[Amit Varma]: For the last few years, our economy has been going down, down, down.
[Amit Varma]: But our stock market has been going up, up, up.
[Amit Varma]: Stock markets are a strange beast.
[Amit Varma]: You can consider them to be the engine of a growing economy or a casino with no relation
[Amit Varma]: to the real world.
[Amit Varma]: For some, they are an object of loathing.
[Amit Varma]: For others, they invoke hope and romance.
[Amit Varma]: I just find them fascinating because they are both a picture of reality and a tussle
[Amit Varma]: between the many fantasies in our heads.
[Amit Varma]: In stock markets, the world of today collides with the world of tomorrow, and perception
[Amit Varma]: matters as much as reality, at least in the short term.
[Amit Varma]: I'm bullish on stock markets, though I'm not sure in a perfect world the stock markets
[Unknown]: would be so bullish right now.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a brilliant Deepak Chinoy, an old friend known to the world as an investing
[Amit Varma]: guru but known to me simply as one of the smartest and nicest and most interesting people
[Amit Varma]: I know.
[Amit Varma]: I never invited him onto the show ostensibly to talk about investing, but cunningly, my
[Amit Varma]: intention was to pick his brains on much, much more.
[Amit Varma]: The mental models through which he looks at the world, including markets, his insights
[Amit Varma]: on investing, his insights on life, and hey, even for his bad jokes, which are second only
[Amit Varma]: to mine.
[Amit Varma]: Deepak runs Capital Mind, a Bangalore-based investment research and wealth management
[Amit Varma]: startup and he also runs the Capital Mind podcast.
[Amit Varma]: All those links will be in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to our conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: I often advise people not to invest in stock markets unless they have studied it first.
[Amit Varma]: That old poker saying applies.
[Amit Varma]: If you don't know who's the sucker at the table, it's you.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you do find it fascinating, then learn about it first.
[Amit Varma]: Listening to this episode and picking up the books Deepak recommends is one way of doing
[Amit Varma]: so.
[Amit Varma]: Today is heading on over to the sponsors of this episode, TheGreatCoursesPlus.com and
[Amit Varma]: enrolling in The Art of Investing.
[Amit Varma]: The Art of Investing is a 24-lecture course taught by John M. Longo and will take you
[Amit Varma]: through all the basics of investing in stock markets.
[Amit Varma]: But that's not all.
[Amit Varma]: The Great Courses Plus has a fantastic library of online courses on subjects ranging from
[Amit Varma]: music, math, cooking, history, political theory, and much else.
[Amit Varma]: They also have an app where you can listen to the audio of these courses the same way
[Amit Varma]: you are listening to this podcast and it will cost you nothing.
[Amit Varma]: You get one month of unlimited free access if you use the following URL, TheGreatCoursesPlus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: TheGreatCoursesPlus.com slash unseen for one month of unlimited free access.
[Amit Varma]: What an investment Deepak, welcome to the scene in the unseen.
[Guest]: Hi Amit, always glad to have a conversation with you and lovely to be unseen in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, this is oddly strangely, you know, after 200 episodes, the first time you're
[Amit Varma]: on the scene in the unseen and the thing is over the years, I've, you know, got so much
[Amit Varma]: delight and insight in the many long conversations that we've had.
[Amit Varma]: And the bizarre thing is, and I wonder what you think about this, that, you know, I was
[Amit Varma]: sitting down figuring out all the areas that I'm going to talk to you about.
[Amit Varma]: And then at one point, it struck me that, wait a minute, this guy has been a personal
[Amit Varma]: friend for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: But many of the personal questions that, you know, are almost standard for me to ask my
[Amit Varma]: guests, I don't actually know about him, you know, and this is weird, because a couple
[Amit Varma]: of days after this, I'm recording with another person who's been a personal friend for a
[Amit Varma]: couple of decades.
[Amit Varma]: And I realized that I don't know that much about her either.
[Amit Varma]: So it's like you build a friendship by just hanging around and talking about whatever,
[Amit Varma]: but you don't actually know so much about, about each other, which was a bit weird.
[Guest]: Which is actually quite fascinating, because you don't generally have relationships like
[Guest]: that after like, say, college or something like that.
[Guest]: So it's almost, almost entirely based on the intellectual framework of what we talk rather
[Guest]: than a families or where are you going and you know, what have you done in the past and
[Guest]: all that stuff, which is definitely like, I mean, it's, that's what I was telling someone
[Guest]: when I was somebody is telling me who is asked, I was telling them who Amit Verma is, I'm
[Guest]: like, dude, he's so many things, man.
[Guest]: He's been a professional poker player.
[Guest]: He's been a writer, he has been a cricket, not just enthusiast, but you know, so deeply
[Guest]: into cricket.
[Guest]: He has held guns in Peshawar.
[Guest]: And and pretended to be non Indian for, you know, so you know, there are so many things
[Guest]: about you that I know, but there's obviously a lot of other things.
[Guest]: Somebody asked me, where is he from, and I'm like, shit, I have no idea.
[Guest]: I don't even know whether he's, whether the Verma that the VARME is a UP wala surname
[Guest]: or a Bengali surname or and whether he's related to Raja Ravi Verma.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, no, no, sadly, I don't have any royal lineage that way, though my father is
[Amit Varma]: Punjabi and he was born just outside Lahore, pre partition.
[Amit Varma]: So some could even say that I am anti-national.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, for those of my listeners who for the first time are wondering what
[Amit Varma]: was Amit doing holding a gun in Peshawar, no, I was not carrying out a secret mission
[Amit Varma]: for the Indian government.
[Amit Varma]: I was covering the Indian cricket tour to Pakistan in 2006.
[Amit Varma]: And I happened to kind of, you know, go to Peshawar at one of the venues and a friend
[Amit Varma]: and I managed to get some people to take us to the gun market, where guns are sold openly.
[Amit Varma]: The friend was a journalist called Fazal Sharif, at that time he used to write for Rediff.
[Amit Varma]: And together we posed with guns, which is the macho-est I have ever looked, I won't
[Amit Varma]: say felt because, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing is, you know, as listeners would have guessed, Deepak and I know each
[Amit Varma]: other from our blogging days, basically, which is where we met.
[Amit Varma]: And I've realized that so many of my friends, in fact, all my closest friends, without exception,
[Amit Varma]: are not people from I know from school or from college or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But really from that time, people who we managed to connect with through the internet in those
[Amit Varma]: days, sort of like minded people doing similar things, and that kind of becomes the basis
[Amit Varma]: for forming this little community.
[Amit Varma]: And this is something we now take for granted, right, that we can just form a community of
[Amit Varma]: choice at any point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And it started with our generation, you know, the generation before us would not have been
[Amit Varma]: able to reach out, you're basically constrained by geography, constrained by accidents of
[Amit Varma]: birth, all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: And now we can actually, you know, reach out and form a community based on shared interests
[Amit Varma]: or whatever the case may be, and it's mind blowing when you think about it.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, it's the Orkut and MySpace and now WhatsApp and perhaps tomorrow Signal of
[Guest]: Real Life.
[Guest]: And that's connected us and you know, it's strange, I have, I think, in the process of
[Guest]: us, you know, knowing each other, I've met you in Bangalore, in Bombay, perhaps in Delhi
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: And I have traveled and lived in each of these places.
[Guest]: And yet, you know, when we talk to each other again, it's almost like, you know, it's starting
[Guest]: from the same point where we left off the last time.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, yeah, it's like you just click into place, you don't have to kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: reconnect again, or figure each other out.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if I met someone from my college days, or whatever, there would be this process of
[Amit Varma]: reconnection, because you're meeting fundamentally a changed person and trying to kind of figure
[Amit Varma]: that out.
[Amit Varma]: But that reminds me there is a lot I don't know about you.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, let's kind of get a little deeper into the history of Deepak Shannoy.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I do want to spend a lot of this time talking about investing in your philosophy
[Amit Varma]: towards money and life and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, tell me a little bit about who the young Deepak Shannoy was like growing
[Amit Varma]: up?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of kid were you?
[Amit Varma]: What did you want to be when you grew up?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what were the influences on you?
[Amit Varma]: What kind of books did you read?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that part of your journey.
[Guest]: So you know, my youngest, perhaps as far as I can remember, my father was in a bank.
[Guest]: So transferable job moving around quite a bit.
[Guest]: You know, I come from this little town in a village in the Western Ghats in Karnataka.
[Guest]: But then since my father was in a bank, we travel everywhere.
[Guest]: So I think my early days were in Udaipur and you know, Agra and a couple of other places.
[Guest]: But then since the time I actually remember things, I was in Bangalore till I think 1983
[Guest]: or 1982.
[Guest]: And I actually studied in a girl's school.
[Guest]: What is a girl's school after fourth standard and boys were allowed till the fourth standard
[Guest]: because I don't know, there's some rule that you know, maybe boys are okay till they're
[Guest]: in the fourth standard and then they get really bad after that.
[Guest]: So it was interesting because I still know people or reconnected with people from that
[Guest]: school.
[Guest]: And they're fascinating personalities, you know, so it's almost like I wish I knew more
[Guest]: at that age that I could have remembered in terms of conversations.
[Guest]: But that part of life was interesting.
[Guest]: It was also the first time I started to learn about books.
[Guest]: This is probably early in my life.
[Guest]: I always liked reading.
[Guest]: I still do to the point where my mom used to literally give me a comic and I would walk
[Guest]: with her through marketplaces when she had to go shopping and I would not complain even
[Guest]: a little bit because I'd read the book every chance I got.
[Guest]: And the books, of course, you know, the early days were Amar Chitra Katha and a bunch of
[Guest]: those things and all that.
[Guest]: But it evolved eventually, I moved to Delhi when I was about after my third standard.
[Guest]: So again, Delhi was very interesting.
[Guest]: It was, we landed up in Delhi, I think the year or maybe the year before the Indira Gandhi
[Guest]: was assassinated.
[Guest]: And that was a learning thing for me because I was like probably 10 years old at the time.
[Guest]: And it was a few days before my birthday.
[Guest]: So I really did not, you know, find it very interesting to have spent the birthday at
[Guest]: home.
[Guest]: But then when I came out, it was a whole new world.
[Guest]: Bunch of things that you don't want to learn when you're 10 years old, you learn and, you
[Guest]: know, it kind of made a very different kind of impact in my life.
[Guest]: Those are the years where you would go everywhere in Delhi and you would see soldiers sitting
[Guest]: in, you know, cages and behind sacks all over the place.
[Guest]: So and you, you know, we found out later that you're not allowed to approach them either.
[Guest]: So it was, it was dangerous to do so.
[Guest]: But I mean, interesting times growing up.
[Guest]: Those are the early days.
[Guest]: I don't think I, I mean, till when after that we moved back to Bangalore, I wrote an exam,
[Guest]: probably the first exam I ever scored any reasonable marks in.
[Guest]: Luckily, that was the 12th standard exams.
[Guest]: So I managed to go to this college called NIT, which is now called NIT Suratkal.
[Guest]: Earlier it was to be REC Suratkal.
[Guest]: And I still like the name REC Suratkal, it's Karnataka REC, so K-R-E-C, which was, I mean,
[Guest]: it has a zing to it, N-I-T-K does not sound as quite as zingy, but that's what the name
[Guest]: of the college is now.
[Guest]: It's a quaint little college in, well, it's not little, it's about 350 acres of campus
[Guest]: in near the beach, it actually has its own beach, but it's next to a beach.
[Guest]: We did not appreciate it then and now I feel sorry I did not appreciate it then.
[Guest]: But that was a formative years because till, you know, when you're, till you're 18 years
[Guest]: old, sheltered, you're at home, do your thing, and you're suddenly thrown into college where
[Guest]: you're alone.
[Guest]: I mean, that's okay, but you get ragged, you do your things, you have to, you know, fend
[Guest]: for yourself.
[Guest]: But you also learn a few things about freedom, about doing stuff the way you want to do them.
[Guest]: And a couple of years in, you kind of realize that you'll never be able to live in a sheltered,
[Guest]: cloistered environment again, simply because you've, for all the good and bad that comes
[Guest]: of it, that you have to wash up notes and stuff like that.
[Guest]: It's just far more acceptable to do that, rather than trade away the other freedoms
[Guest]: that you have.
[Guest]: So college was eye opening for that, and from another perspective, because I finally discovered
[Guest]: what I thought I would do for the rest of my life, which is computer programming, because
[Guest]: somewhere in the, they used to call me LAN user, because, you know, in the first year,
[Guest]: you had these local area networks that were set up in the college, and everybody got the
[Guest]: same user ID.
[Guest]: You had to log in with the user ID LAN user, and the password was LAN user, very creative,
[Guest]: you know, thing.
[Guest]: So I was, because I went then, first year, I discovered that I really like this stuff.
[Guest]: And maybe I wasn't very good at it, but I was just at it at the time.
[Guest]: And I learned from a few other people that I went and I was initially in this branch
[Guest]: in mechanical engineering, and then I asked for a shift to computer engineering.
[Guest]: And that's when I discovered that I really like the subject, the concept of it, and relatively
[Guest]: knew that I was 1992, 1993.
[Guest]: The interesting thing about this part of my life was that I was, I didn't know what I
[Guest]: wanted to do.
[Guest]: I had no idea.
[Guest]: I'd worked with some computers in the earlier past, but I'd never actually seen, you know,
[Guest]: computers really work.
[Guest]: And they told us at one point that you're not allowed to play games.
[Guest]: So we said, okay, you know what, we're going to write our own game.
[Guest]: So I wrote a very weird version of Pac-Man, and then, you know, nobody could say anything
[Guest]: because it was a game I programmed.
[Guest]: So I was like, I'm testing it, it's perfectly legal to do.
[Guest]: And so the word LAN user, I was a nerd for all practical purposes, probably still am,
[Guest]: but finance makes you less nerdy, I guess.
[Guest]: But interestingly, you know, that college actually opened it up because what happens
[Guest]: was there was, because of its relative distance from anything human, they allowed you a lot
[Guest]: of things.
[Guest]: So for instance, I was given the permission to keep the LAN open until whatever time I
[Guest]: wanted.
[Guest]: I was given a key and said, you know, just shut it down when you're done.
[Guest]: So we do these things and we'd learn a lot of these things.
[Guest]: And then once I got into my second year, the first year is in my college was common across
[Guest]: all branches.
[Guest]: Everybody took the same subjects.
[Guest]: The second year onwards, you got your specific subjects.
[Guest]: And then it carried on further.
[Guest]: We did very interesting things with stuff that you can do on your phone in five minutes.
[Guest]: Sometimes it would take us two or three days to do, so you had to prep for it.
[Guest]: So you had to think about the code that you'd write, and then you'd write it, and then you'd
[Guest]: hit the compile or render or whatever it was that you did.
[Guest]: And suddenly it would take two days for it to render something, which was like a little
[Guest]: box coming out of something else.
[Guest]: And because I don't even ask because we, I mean, the first, this is all again, you know,
[Guest]: stuff that when our parents used to tell us things like, you know, Deepak, you don't know
[Guest]: the value of poverty.
[Guest]: And you know, I used to, before I took my, went to school, I had to take water out of
[Guest]: the well and have the seven brothers and sisters I had, all of them had to have a bath.
[Guest]: And then I would walk five miles to college, to school.
[Guest]: And then they would carry, I'd be like, dude, this is just like, this is just stuff that
[Guest]: I, I mean, I'll never do, I'll never be able to even see an op, I just turn the tap and
[Guest]: water comes.
[Guest]: It's pretty much that effort.
[Guest]: So my, when I tell my kids, you know, I used to operate in a time when you had 1.44 inch
[Guest]: floppies.
[Guest]: And I don't know, there was another one, three, some three and a quarter or five and a quarter
[Guest]: inch floppies.
[Guest]: And you didn't have hard disks, so one of the drives contained your basic compiler and
[Guest]: the other one contained the place where your code was stored.
[Guest]: And if you had only one drive, you had to put one in, load the basic into memory, and
[Guest]: then put the second one in to store your program.
[Guest]: So it was like, crazy stuff that, you know, my kids look at me like, what's a floppy disk?
[Guest]: I'm like, it's the before, what's what came before CDs, like, what is, what's a CD?
[Guest]: And I'm like, okay, dude, I am done.
[Guest]: I mean, this is at this point, it's like, you know, but I mean, I lived that life, which
[Guest]: I guess is exotic from today's perspective, but, you know, today would be exotic for them.
[Guest]: So you know, that makes us even, but, you know, all through this early days of well,
[Guest]: I think the point was, while I liked reading a lot, I still do, most of it for at least
[Guest]: the first 20, 20 odd years of my life was fiction.
[Guest]: So nice, you know, from the Frederick Fawcett's to Arthur Haley's, and you know, the stuff
[Guest]: that, you know, was probably exciting at the time, and the Asterix's and the Tintin's,
[Guest]: and later the Calvin and Hobbes, that became kind of a story of choice.
[Guest]: But then, soon after college, I mean, that was just the early part of my life, I'm rambling
[Guest]: a little bit over there.
[Guest]: So but I kind of finished college and joined this company, which is now Emphasis, that
[Guest]: time it was called BFL software, there was a bunch of mergers and all that.
[Guest]: And I was sent to the US in about three months, and at that time, things were very weird,
[Guest]: because I was sent as a qualified engineer to the US on a project where I literally did
[Guest]: not know more than maybe 20 lines of code.
[Guest]: So I had to go there, I had to pretend that I, I mean, not pretend, but I told them I'm
[Guest]: new to this.
[Guest]: And we figured out the code, mostly after we'd gone there, met a bunch of customers,
[Guest]: you know, did a lot of crazy things, because your first time in the US, you have no idea
[Guest]: what to expect.
[Guest]: I remember I'd gone to this place called Omaha, I mean, now it's more famous because of Warren
[Guest]: Buffett, because at that time, it was famous for Jackal, I think.
[Guest]: But you know, at, at the time, I hadn't even heard of Omaha.
[Guest]: And I, nobody told me that when they say minus two degrees with a windchill of minus 20 degrees,
[Guest]: it actually means you're going to feel like it's minus 20 degrees.
[Guest]: So I went to the little jacket, which had absolutely no chance against, you know, even
[Guest]: minus two degrees, but then I was willing to risk it.
[Guest]: But minus 20, I mean, it's like, oh, dude, I am dying.
[Guest]: So we went in, it was kind of embarrassing, because when we landed up there with that
[Guest]: jacket, the customers looked at us, are you like, are you serious?
[Guest]: Because you're gonna die in that.
[Guest]: So we said, okay, and then we had to go pick up a jacket from one of the supermarkets.
[Guest]: And you know, I think I use a jacket for literally all my cold, you know, adventures for at least
[Guest]: 20 years afterwards, it was pretty good.
[Guest]: But you could not even think of wearing that in India, it was just impossible.
[Guest]: It's just one of those things that's, you know, but that taught me a lot about living
[Guest]: in America, different ways.
[Guest]: You have a very fancy view of this, right?
[Guest]: So you sit in India, and you read books about this and that, you go there and say, well,
[Guest]: these are the same people, just different accent, right?
[Guest]: It's not, in a way, superheroes kind of thought process that you started off with.
[Guest]: And also the place, it's, I mean, it's developed, yes, but, you know, there is some kind of
[Guest]: wretched poverty is there as well.
[Guest]: And there is a kind of standard of living that you suddenly realize that life is very
[Guest]: limiting if you don't have a lot of money, very obvious in the US, later in my adventures
[Guest]: in Europe, I found that was not so much the case, but I mean, after I finished that, I
[Guest]: think my only thing in college was that I want to start my own business.
[Guest]: I didn't know why, but I really wanted to start my own business.
[Guest]: And when I went to the US, I was applying to colleges to do my master's degree in science
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And then I decided I won't because I want to start my own business.
[Guest]: But for some reason, I had a job offer from the company that I was visiting, and they
[Guest]: were kind of cutting off the contract with the emphasis at the time of BFL at the time.
[Guest]: And they said, we'd like to hire you guys.
[Guest]: And we said, okay, we're okay with that.
[Guest]: And now, unfortunately, my father passed away in India at the time, 24, it was very complicated,
[Guest]: because he was a banker, he had held the key to a lot of finances in the family.
[Guest]: And I had no idea what any of that stuff was that he did.
[Guest]: So also, I mean, of course, grief was one that was very complicated, because, you know,
[Guest]: I always thought that I never spent enough time.
[Guest]: And now I still regret that in the sense of, I went to college, I was doing my own thing.
[Guest]: And I remember my mom, after I had gotten out of college, I was desperate to get started
[Guest]: on my job.
[Guest]: And my mom said, you know, stay on for a couple of months more, you have another job offer
[Guest]: that starts in November, why are you leaving now?
[Guest]: So I said, No, I am going because I want to start working early, as early as possible.
[Guest]: This was August.
[Guest]: Now, he passed away in February the next year.
[Guest]: So that two months would have been nice, but, you know, such is life.
[Guest]: Unfortunately, I wasn't able to, you know, spend that much time with him.
[Guest]: When I was, you know, when I had the time, and you know, sometimes that that that old
[Guest]: saying of, you know, the cats in the cradle, the song kind of come to mind, you know, it's
[Guest]: strange, because that song was something I heard in college.
[Guest]: And I said, Listen, this is deep, but I don't understand it.
[Guest]: And I knew it was deep, but I didn't understand.
[Guest]: And it's like Calvin and Hobbes, the first time when you read it, when you're a kid,
[Guest]: you don't, you know, there's something in there that's deeper.
[Guest]: And as you go further in life, you say, that is like philosophy, it's not a cartoon.
[Guest]: But there's something in that song that that kind of talked to me that time.
[Guest]: And then when my father passed away, I had that, I heard the song again.
[Guest]: And then I was like, this is real.
[Guest]: And now when I have kids, it's just a different meaning altogether, you're dealing with it
[Guest]: from three different angles.
[Guest]: And you know, it's the same song.
[Guest]: And it's beautiful.
[Guest]: So but since that time, and I came back to India, I said, Listen, I'm not taking the
[Guest]: job in the US, I have to figure out more stuff.
[Guest]: And I think if my goal is to start a business, then I should do it here in India and the
[Guest]: US was, and this is what my dad told me before he passed away, like, if you want to start
[Guest]: a business, why are you locking yourself to a six year period in the US when you can't
[Guest]: start a business?
[Guest]: So like, what do you mean is then I looked it up and said, Yeah, I mean, if you're in
[Guest]: an H1B visa, until you get yourself a green card, you can't start a business, you can
[Guest]: join a business that started, they can process your visa, but you can't really start a business.
[Guest]: I mean, it's complicated at the time.
[Guest]: So I said, Dude, I'm not doing this, I'm going back to India, I want to start my business.
[Guest]: So a couple of years down the line, started a business, we built a lot of things for people
[Guest]: using a language called Delphi, pretty computer thing, but came into this finance thing at
[Guest]: that time, because we started writing software for companies that wanted accounting as part
[Guest]: of their application.
[Guest]: So I was like, what is this accounting business, let me read it.
[Guest]: And you know, my father, my uncle, everybody in the family were bankers, my surname kind
[Guest]: of gives it away.
[Guest]: But that's how, you know, the whole family was.
[Guest]: And I was this dude, I'm a computer engineer.
[Guest]: And I was different from everybody else.
[Guest]: So it's this accounting thing that kind of came by.
[Guest]: And through this process, I learned about accounting.
[Guest]: I started my own business when I was 24, I think.
[Guest]: And then I ran that till I was about 30 before I got married.
[Guest]: And in this process, we built accounting packages, we built something that was an Indian accounting
[Guest]: package.
[Guest]: And we got, so what we found interesting in this whole thing was that you could look at
[Guest]: public companies, because they would give their accounts to the public every year and
[Guest]: every quarter.
[Guest]: And you could actually download it from their websites.
[Guest]: Somewhere in the middle, we started looking at this and saying, okay, we could download
[Guest]: this account, we can get these.
[Guest]: So got interested in public markets, started writing about it in 2005, worked a couple
[Guest]: more companies.
[Guest]: I think I got, if I say I'm good at something, it's only because I was really bad at it.
[Guest]: And I decided not to be through the process.
[Guest]: So I think I was, when I look at my early posts, even now, I cringe and say, what kind
[Guest]: of thought process was that?
[Guest]: But it's good now, I mean, the blog came along.
[Guest]: And you know, here I am, I won't bore you with the further details of what else happened.
[Guest]: But I hope this has been, it's a very different part.
[Guest]: I think I met you in like 2007 or something.
[Guest]: So since then, we've been in touch.
[Guest]: I guess I came to Bombay, I did a bunch of things around algorithmic trading.
[Guest]: Before and I found out to my chagrin, it was even legal.
[Guest]: So it was, it was apparently not legal to auto trade.
[Guest]: So we had to physically and hit the enter key whenever you actually enter a trade.
[Guest]: So we did that so that you could hit, I mean, so a human being had to say okay on a trade
[Guest]: before it was, it went to the exchange.
[Guest]: Now of course, things have changed and you can trade automatically, computers can work
[Guest]: with each other.
[Guest]: But we wanted to build this stuff in 2008, fascinating because I helped in another hedge
[Guest]: fund which actually did this when SEBI finally legalized it.
[Guest]: And now, you know, they're 30% of the volume of the exchange.
[Guest]: So I'm saying algo trading as not just this firm, but algo trading as a whole is now a
[Guest]: feature of the exchange.
[Guest]: They started Capital Mind, of course, when it was 2013.
[Guest]: That's kind of blossomed into a fairly decent business.
[Guest]: And I suppose you'll probably ask me a bunch around investing.
[Guest]: So I'll probably go into detail when we when we go through that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, before we get to sort of investing and Capital Mind and algo trading about which
[Amit Varma]: I also want to ask you, you know, the backstory is really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And there are a bunch of threads from here that I want to pull, which actually come kind
[Amit Varma]: of to the same question.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, one, of course, is, you know, what you said about being really bad at it before
[Amit Varma]: you got good at it.
[Amit Varma]: And that struck a chord with me, because I just came about this thread on Twitter by
[Amit Varma]: a random person I won't name, not an Indian, but basically which went viral.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things he said in that thread was that, you know, I don't follow people
[Amit Varma]: who post regularly, because you know, you can't get a great flash of insight every day.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're posting too regularly, I don't follow you.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I prefer people who post just once in a while.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought, wait a minute, that is completely the wrong way around.
[Amit Varma]: Because when you begin doing something, you're bad at it.
[Amit Varma]: What makes for excellence, repeated iteration makes for excellence.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you do something repeatedly every freaking day, and you always begin something
[Amit Varma]: is bad, and then you get good at it, because you've done it again and again and again.
[Amit Varma]: And examples from the blogging world would be something like Marginal Revolution, for
[Amit Varma]: example, or, and you know, literally anything, you know, Virat Kohli was not going to the
[Amit Varma]: nets once a week, he was going there and spending seven hours a day every freaking day through
[Amit Varma]: his childhood, till iteration, iteration, iteration, and you get to excellence.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of that process of learning something that I want to delve deeper into.
[Amit Varma]: One is, you know, for our listeners, just before we started this Deepak and I were being
[Amit Varma]: nostalgic about the bad old days, I would say, when, you know, you couldn't do anything
[Amit Varma]: on the computer, because you plug anything in, you've got to install 40 drivers, and
[Amit Varma]: nothing works together and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And we were just setting up our mics and stuff before this, and it was all relatively smooth.
[Amit Varma]: And it struck me that we are sort of that, again, I'll say a unique generation, perhaps
[Amit Varma]: not in a good way, just in an interesting way, that one, we do a lot of our learning,
[Amit Varma]: our formative years are spent before the internet.
[Amit Varma]: So we are restricted in terms of what we can learn by whatever we are privileged to have
[Amit Varma]: around us, which could be the books that we have, or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And both of us are relatively privileged in Indian terms, in the sense we got to read
[Amit Varma]: a lot when we were growing up and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, we don't really have access to most of the knowledge in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And then at least in my case, another big part of my learning comes even growing up
[Amit Varma]: when the internet happens, and when I'm exposed to ideas and all of this from everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And the question that I'm leading up to is, one, did this sort of process happen with
[Amit Varma]: you as well?
[Amit Varma]: And two, how does one build up mental frameworks to which we look at the world?
[Amit Varma]: Like one thing that I've noticed about you is that while you're brilliant at investing,
[Amit Varma]: one of the reasons that makes you much more interesting than other investors I have met
[Amit Varma]: is that you are bringing to bear mental models, which have to do not just with investing alone,
[Amit Varma]: which have to do with life, which have to do with human beings, with the way we behave.
[Amit Varma]: And then you're applying a lot of it to investing.
[Amit Varma]: And then obviously, you're getting a lot of specific domain specific insights as well.
[Amit Varma]: But how did building these mental models kind of happen?
[Amit Varma]: What was this process like of the formation of Deepak Shenoy as a person?
[Amit Varma]: Because with most people, this would happen by the time you're 20 to 23, it has happened.
[Amit Varma]: But for people who are in their mid 40s, like us, and I think our ages are not a secret
[Amit Varma]: to anyone.
[Amit Varma]: It's been this complicated, almost staggered process, where the internet sort of causes
[Amit Varma]: this explosion.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, you learn all over again.
[Guest]: So what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Yes, you know, I mean, if you think about the internet, it's actually changed one big
[Guest]: thing, which is opportunity for us.
[Guest]: You could not do this without a lot of the stuff that we're doing, including what we're
[Guest]: doing right now, without the internet.
[Guest]: And one of the things that I realized is that the hunger for knowledge exists, and maybe
[Guest]: it was privilege, maybe it was whatever it was, that you could solve that hunger for
[Guest]: knowledge in different ways when you're younger.
[Guest]: I always felt, for instance, I mean, I am a social person, but I'm actually quite introvertish
[Guest]: when it comes to a lot of gatherings and all that stuff.
[Guest]: So I prefer to sit and curl up and read and, you know, think and walk and all that stuff.
[Guest]: But somewhere, so this is where I think I credit my college for this, is that you got
[Guest]: long periods to yourself, long, very, really long, and then in this process was the discovery
[Guest]: of myself.
[Guest]: Maybe it was in bits and pieces over time.
[Guest]: But what I discovered is that there are a lot of things that I like, I mean, I like
[Guest]: marginally and a little bit here and there, the stuff that and there is very clearly stuff
[Guest]: I don't like, Fourier transforms, I think that is one thing I can tell you categorically
[Guest]: that I don't like.
[Guest]: I don't like to eat curd or cheese, something I discovered when I was young, so I was, I
[Guest]: cannot do it.
[Guest]: And I, even in college mess, people would fight for a seat next to me because I would
[Guest]: give them my little ration of curd that you'd be like, dude, I don't want it in my plate.
[Guest]: And people would swap that with like, even chicken.
[Guest]: And I was like, dude, this is like a, I mean, you want to do this bargain every day, I'm
[Guest]: on for it.
[Guest]: But, but that was like, you know, a few things that I didn't like a few things that I liked
[Guest]: in mental models, when you're younger is like, you shouldn't not like something.
[Guest]: And you shouldn't tell some, because when you as you grow up, you have to be polite,
[Guest]: you have to try and learn stuff, right?
[Guest]: You can't categorically say, I don't like this subject, and because you have to do it,
[Guest]: it's part of, but somewhere along the lines, I found out that what I liked, I would pursue
[Guest]: and maybe it was the kind of college I was in, or maybe the kind of person I was in,
[Guest]: I have no shame in losing, or, you know, it's like, when you crack a bad joke, and people
[Guest]: like want to kill you.
[Guest]: And then you don't crack bad jokes, because they want to kill you.
[Guest]: I was never the kind of guy who would stop at not, but I would not crack the bad joke.
[Guest]: I'm like, dude, if you want to kill me, kill me, but I want to keep trying.
[Guest]: So once once in a while, you get a good job, but mostly bad even now.
[Guest]: So, but interestingly, that philosophy maintains itself even in.
[Guest]: So it's like, you know, when you're doing something, you want to try it.
[Guest]: And the best thing about computers in the early stages was that you could do this, you
[Guest]: would hit compile, and then it would say error, then say, okay, it's an error, let me go back
[Guest]: and fix it.
[Guest]: And somewhere along the line, you learn that this is the right way to do things.
[Guest]: And then even that right way to do things keeps changing over a long period of time.
[Guest]: And it's a learning process throughout there.
[Guest]: From the time when I started, there was Visual Basic to start that then there was Pascal
[Guest]: and C++.
[Guest]: And now there are, you know, name the I mean, they have languages which don't have vowels
[Guest]: and their languages with only vowels and no syllables.
[Guest]: And, you know, there's a guy who's made a YouTube video and all the different kinds
[Guest]: of languages out there, which is like, it's an hour long, and he's like, I'm not even
[Guest]: scratched the surface, and I believe him.
[Guest]: But at that time, my deal was, I want to learn all these programming languages, I want to
[Guest]: learn Fortran, I did, I learned COBOL, I taught COBOL in my final year, to other people and
[Guest]: earn some money out of it, because they had a job which had a COBOL as an entrance this
[Guest]: thing, paper or something like that.
[Guest]: So I learned COBOL, in order to be able to earn the money to do other things.
[Guest]: So this process, this thought process has kind of continued since then, you're curious
[Guest]: about something, you'd learn it, find it interesting, delve into it some more, during the process
[Guest]: of accounting, or learning accounting.
[Guest]: And by the way, accounting is this weird thing, I still don't think I get it.
[Guest]: But it has these, you know, in English language, they'll say, Oh, you know what, in there are
[Guest]: some letters that are silent.
[Guest]: And you're like, why?
[Guest]: And then you'll ask about this, and then they'll come to you with a letter like through, and
[Guest]: then through has THR, which is fine, and then OUGH, which is like, excuse me, why?
[Guest]: Why do you have all those extra letters?
[Guest]: And why is there an H and a G and you know, but obviously, there are some rules and you
[Guest]: kind of learn that these are rules and you can't violate these rules.
[Guest]: And the same way in accounting, there are some rules, some stuff which you don't understand,
[Guest]: which is not logical, but it's there.
[Guest]: That's the way they've decided things are.
[Guest]: And then you look at this thing and say, well, you know what, this doesn't seem to add up
[Guest]: because you said these two add up to that, and it doesn't add up.
[Guest]: And then they tell you, well, that's because the company is bullshitting its way out here,
[Guest]: they've added somewhere else and something else is on, excuse me, company can do this.
[Guest]: And then you find out that companies are this stuff that people use to cook their books
[Guest]: and this stuff that's real.
[Guest]: So over time, it's fascinating to try and find those little things, it's like these
[Guest]: little puzzles that come around to you.
[Guest]: So looking at stuff, looking at numbers, and my wife and my kids also now look at me and
[Guest]: say, dad, that's just like numbers.
[Guest]: And I'm like, yeah, that's my job.
[Guest]: But then I'll be looking at those numbers with this fascination that says, well, now
[Guest]: I can figure out that something isn't right.
[Guest]: If I looked at those numbers, somewhere, some things start to throw themselves at you and
[Guest]: saying, got to look here a little bit closer.
[Guest]: It's the strangest thing because today, for instance, there was the results of an IT company.
[Guest]: So the one number I looked for is how much they have in transportation charges.
[Guest]: I mean, because nobody's flying, you can't be spending a whole lot of money on transport
[Guest]: at this point.
[Guest]: So it was, of course, in line with what I thought.
[Guest]: But then I realized that when I was talking to you, I was like, why would I look at that?
[Guest]: It's not because Deepak Sinha knows that this is a problem, it's just that somewhere the
[Guest]: mental models come in together and said, since COVID, you've got these issues.
[Guest]: Companies reveal this information on a quarterly basis.
[Guest]: This is one quarter where you might have seen the emergence of some travel recur.
[Guest]: And yet you've, so you go in with that thought process.
[Guest]: But if you ask a different person, you might not look at that number.
[Guest]: You might look at a completely different number.
[Guest]: But it's just the way that these conditions, conditionings have happened.
[Guest]: I think they've happened mostly because, you know, there's this Finding Nemo line I love
[Guest]: to write about.
[Guest]: I like it.
[Guest]: I think I've done it multiple times.
[Guest]: And Finding Nemo, apologies to everybody, I'm going to quote cartoon lines because I
[Guest]: have two kids and I have watched every cartoon that has ever not lived.
[Guest]: But one of the lines in Finding Nemo is when this Dory and this Nemo's dad, Marlon.
[Guest]: So they're together and Marlon is really distraught because he can't seem to find his son.
[Guest]: And Dory's like, what happened?
[Guest]: It's like, you know, I told his mother, Nemo's mother, that I wouldn't let anything happen
[Guest]: to him.
[Guest]: So she's like, Dory's like, that's strange.
[Guest]: If you don't let anything happen to him, then nothing will ever happen to him.
[Guest]: So I think all of us live in those protective cocoons of ourselves, not just our kids, but
[Guest]: ourselves.
[Guest]: Saying, if I make mistakes, I'll screw up, I'll look bad, whatever it is.
[Guest]: But if you don't make mistakes, how do you eventually not make mistakes?
[Guest]: You have to go out there and experiment and try these things.
[Guest]: You don't know what will happen and yeah, you might be wrong.
[Guest]: And sometimes in stock markets, you actually pay a price.
[Guest]: In most other places, you don't.
[Guest]: If you're not good at cooking, at best you'll ruin a meal and you'll call Swiggy, which
[Guest]: is by the way, a new thing, earlier you had to cook again.
[Guest]: But if you don't do that, nobody will trust that you know cooking.
[Guest]: I could read 500 cookbooks, but I'm still not going to be able to cook well if I haven't
[Guest]: cooked and made a mess of myself before.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, this goes back to our earlier point of sort of endless iterations.
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember in my poker playing days, somebody once asked a question that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what does it tell you about a player if his bluffs never get called?
[Amit Varma]: And the answer obviously is that he isn't bluffing enough.
[Amit Varma]: Because there are an optimal number of bluffs you have to make.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, I would say that if you're someone who never makes mistakes, then you're
[Amit Varma]: not living life as it should, you're just way too safe to become good at anything.
[Amit Varma]: You have to make lots of mistakes at date.
[Amit Varma]: And I was, you know, struck by sort of, you know, you spoke about making bad jokes.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that is one of those things where repeated iterations don't really make one
[Amit Varma]: better, because I have the same problem.
[Amit Varma]: And I was just thinking, you know, the moment you said Fortran, I thought if I go to Gurgaon
[Amit Varma]: and tell somebody that, hey, I have learned Fortran, he will say, I have learned Fivetran.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, let us not iterate too much on this, we are not kind of going to get better.
[Amit Varma]: And the most delightful thing about your answer, though, was the connection between Curd and
[Amit Varma]: Fourier transforms, which, again, is possibly unique to you, no one else would use those
[Amit Varma]: two in the same sort of sentence.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, is it then fair to say from all of this that, and I don't know which way the
[Amit Varma]: causation goes, is it fair to say that computer programming, learning computer programming,
[Amit Varma]: gives you sort of a systematic way of, you know, looking at, you know, how things function
[Amit Varma]: and therefore how the world functions.
[Amit Varma]: And you can, you know, transplant that systematic way of thinking on to other things.
[Amit Varma]: Or, of course, the causation could be the other way around, and it might be the case
[Amit Varma]: that people who become good at computer programming are possibly those who are drawn to that kind
[Amit Varma]: of systematic thinking to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: Either ways, I mean, they can, one can reinforce the other.
[Amit Varma]: But is there kind of a sort of a link between that?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you talk about mental model, the one key point that you made was that if you're
[Amit Varma]: interested in something, you kind of go down a rabbit hole, which is pretty much what I
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I can watch a random YouTube video and then watch all 400 videos in that channel
[Amit Varma]: by before the night is over, partly aided by the fact that I watch at double speed.
[Amit Varma]: But is that kind of part of the process?
[Amit Varma]: And also, I would imagine that, you know, learning accounting, for example, which I
[Amit Varma]: imagine was sort of the bridge between computer software to actually getting into investing
[Amit Varma]: in all of that, because first you build this accounting software and you have to figure
[Amit Varma]: it out.
[Amit Varma]: And it must be really boring.
[Amit Varma]: At what point does it begin to get interesting for you, where you say that, fuck, this is
[Amit Varma]: fascinating, I need to learn more about this.
[Amit Varma]: And then how does that process of learning happen?
[Amit Varma]: Like I know very little about investing, I know that there is, you know, Benjamin Graham's
[Amit Varma]: value investing school with, you know, which Warren Buffet follows, and there are the quants
[Amit Varma]: who will do their things.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, and today, of course, is machine learning and AI and algorithmic
[Amit Varma]: trading and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So at what point does it begin to fascinate you?
[Amit Varma]: Why does it begin to fascinate you?
[Amit Varma]: And then how do you sort of teach yourself or learn that subject?
[Guest]: I think, you know, this is actually, I think it's many iterations of what has happened.
[Guest]: And I'll come to the latest ones.
[Guest]: You know, again, it's sometimes what helps me is to think of, again, another cartoon
[Guest]: is Ratatouille is a movie, and this guy who says anyone can cook.
[Guest]: It doesn't mean that everyone can cook, it means that, you know, some the best cook can
[Guest]: come out of, you know.
[Guest]: So sometimes my biggest problems in life is this call to authority.
[Guest]: People tell me this, oh, you know what this guy has said, so therefore it is, but it's
[Guest]: not so many times.
[Guest]: So because I'm by nature irreverent, when I say I'm a rebellious, I don't like to just
[Guest]: take statements at face value, because they're given to me.
[Guest]: But also, the curiosity of something drives a lot of the thinking.
[Guest]: And while I think it's the computer programming thought process, perhaps it's the way that's
[Guest]: evolved for me.
[Guest]: It's up for somebody else with that curiosity model, it might have evolved differently.
[Guest]: The difference is that if you are, for instance, somebody told me this in college, if you're
[Guest]: in a computer lab, and you make an error, you just press Ctrl F9 and you can do it again.
[Guest]: If I'm in a chemical lab, I'm not going to make too many errors, right?
[Guest]: So I have to plan and think and do, you know, I don't know, I'd blow up the whole lab if
[Guest]: I screw up.
[Guest]: And people in the mechanical world, in the civil world, you can't experiment with creating
[Guest]: a building, because, you know, it's got to be structurally solid, so you want to think
[Guest]: about it, plan it somewhere else and all that stuff.
[Guest]: So we get afforded a little more on the mistake platform than people in other industries or
[Guest]: engineering courses are.
[Guest]: And then in the humanities, there's no concept called an error, everything is an opinion
[Guest]: at some level.
[Guest]: So it's nice.
[Guest]: I wish I'd done that, because you'd have appreciated life is as an engineer sucks, because you'd
[Guest]: want rationality in everything.
[Guest]: And then it takes your whole life to figure out that irrationality is the only thing that
[Guest]: survives.
[Guest]: Because you have today I mean, you know, the old adage was that there were two squirrels
[Guest]: and one of them stored its nuts for the winter and the other one just was having fun and
[Guest]: now, you know, how when winter came, the one nut, you know, starved to death and the other
[Guest]: one was okay, and that was supposed to be a moral lesson.
[Guest]: And now they give you the same thing with a different two captions where the second
[Guest]: one starving and then there's the whole list of, you know, people who are protesting saying,
[Guest]: how can one guy have all the nuts when the other fellow is starving and then therefore
[Guest]: they take the nuts away from the first guy and then give it to the second guy and the
[Guest]: third guy like, look, why do you have to spend all that energy doing all those nuts saving
[Guest]: when we could have had fun.
[Guest]: But interestingly, those models are so I think I must have lost myself in this whole thing.
[Guest]: But for me, the mental model started working saying, things have to be rational, things
[Guest]: have to come one after the other.
[Guest]: And then you slowly build up on that.
[Guest]: And even now, I think that's what happens.
[Guest]: So for instance, that my latest, somewhere in the middle, and, you know, my wife remembers
[Guest]: this because I was obsessed with it for like, I think, four weeks, I had to find out about
[Guest]: nuclear power.
[Guest]: Don't ask me why.
[Guest]: And I didn't know anything about it.
[Guest]: So I had to find out how nuclear reactors were made, specifically because I was like,
[Guest]: I'm curious about this whole subject and I want to find out.
[Guest]: So I spent like days and days looking into nuclear power and reactors and what specifically
[Guest]: thorium played as a part in that process.
[Guest]: So in the end, I was left with a lot of information, almost completely useless.
[Guest]: I hope it will be useful at some point in the future.
[Guest]: But I mean, it's just like I wanted to get a feel of the subject, I understood what the
[Guest]: thorium cycle was the fact that India was at that time, the forefront of thorium based
[Guest]: nuclear technology, perhaps is one of the furthest down that line, even today, India
[Guest]: has the second largest reserves of thorium in the world, we could produce we have had
[Guest]: a functioning reactor for the last 25 years, 25, yeah, this year, it will be 25 in Bombay,
[Guest]: which is an experimental reactor that can actually produce its own fuel as a byproduct
[Guest]: of this process.
[Guest]: One of the first and earliest, you know, users of this technology, and it uses thorium as
[Guest]: one of the fuels.
[Guest]: And the other thing that it actually produces uranium, which is so rare in the world.
[Guest]: So why this actually happened, I don't know.
[Guest]: But somewhere down this process, I said, okay, there's got to be a reason why people think
[Guest]: this is bad nuclear stuff.
[Guest]: And eventually I found, okay, nuclear is not bad.
[Guest]: I mean, I know people may disagree and say, okay, no, no, it's not environmentally friendly.
[Guest]: But in the scale of environment friendliness as a whole, the nuclear power generation process
[Guest]: is the most environmentally friendly in less people have died in all of the nuclear accidents
[Guest]: all over the world, even considering effects downstream and so on, than in probably any
[Guest]: other form of power generation in the world.
[Guest]: And I don't say this because, you know, I'm just quoting a magazine or anything like that.
[Guest]: But because I've gone through the data, I've combed through it and seen how this stuff
[Guest]: functions.
[Guest]: And even though we have movies like Chernobyl, which comes along and talks about a lot of
[Guest]: things and how nuclear holocausts and all that stuff happen, I don't, I mean, I think
[Guest]: now, I mean, I'm comfortable in understanding that.
[Guest]: The reason why I'm saying this is because the mental model that caused me to go down
[Guest]: this hole was because perhaps somewhere someone had commented that this stuff is unsafe.
[Guest]: In order to find out for myself, it got fascinating.
[Guest]: And why it got fascinating was something in the middle that triggered and said, oh, shit,
[Guest]: wait, wait, what about that?
[Guest]: And one of the factors that did that for me was that India had the second largest thorium
[Guest]: reserves in the world.
[Guest]: I'm like, but we don't have that many nuclear reactors, do we?
[Guest]: And then it turns out we do have a fair number, but nowhere close to what is eventually required.
[Guest]: And thorium has, thorium is on the beaches of Kerala.
[Guest]: Fascinating fact, but it's strewn around.
[Guest]: It's one of the largest things out there.
[Guest]: It's probably lesser now than it used to be then.
[Guest]: But so when you think about how your philosophy evolves over time, I've learned that you can
[Guest]: somehow latch on to philosophies or mental models, even when you're doing the stranger
[Guest]: things, playing solitaire.
[Guest]: You could play solitaire.
[Guest]: You could lose.
[Guest]: You could come back and win again.
[Guest]: And you've seen this in poker.
[Guest]: You can either keep playing poker endlessly without learning, and a lot of people do that.
[Guest]: And you could do this with bridge as well.
[Guest]: And you could play contract bridge forever and not learn.
[Guest]: Or you could go down a little bit further and said, dude, this is a game of probabilities.
[Guest]: You're going to play the probability game, but you have to understand how the probabilities
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: You have to figure out how they're arranged.
[Guest]: And if you know how they're arranged, you instantly start to make mental models about
[Guest]: poker or bridge.
[Guest]: In bridge, for instance, if the bidding happens in a certain way, you get a certain clue on
[Guest]: the lie of the table.
[Guest]: And then you start making immediate eliminations in your mind.
[Guest]: I am not a very good chess player.
[Guest]: I'm probably a terrible chess player.
[Guest]: But in chess, you do this like probably 100 times more than you do in bridge.
[Guest]: But you eliminate possibilities more than you include them.
[Guest]: And over time, what you're doing when you're playing is that you're finding a better way
[Guest]: to do the same thing that you were doing, brute force methods.
[Guest]: So somebody tells you that in blackjack you count, and there's a reason you count.
[Guest]: But if you played blackjack enough, even if you didn't read the books and read the literature
[Guest]: around it, you know that if there have been enough face cards that have already come,
[Guest]: after some time you learn this, that you don't want to bet anymore.
[Guest]: If the more number of face cards have come in, your chances of getting a face card, of
[Guest]: the dealer getting hit and going out later, reduces somewhat.
[Guest]: So this kind of mental modeling comes to you after some time, and it's just sometimes that
[Guest]: it clicks, and sometimes it doesn't.
[Guest]: So for me, it has never clicked in Sudoku.
[Guest]: I have been playing it for a long time, and I somehow have never found it useful enough
[Guest]: to go down and try and figure out how I could play this a lot better than I do right now.
[Guest]: But I've done this with, say, a bridge or some of the other games that I play.
[Guest]: But what I think is fascinating is that it's about interest.
[Guest]: If I was not interested in accounting, and I don't know how I got interested in accounting,
[Guest]: it was a pleasure in finding out the interesting things about it.
[Guest]: So even today, I look at accounts, and I marvel at some things.
[Guest]: Like for instance, they say that the three things that you can never figure out is death,
[Guest]: taxes, and how Reliance makes profits.
[Guest]: But how Reliance makes profits is a book by itself, because for every era, there's a nice
[Guest]: little accounting technique that they use.
[Guest]: And it's very nerdy accounting stuff, but you're like, dude, I like this, man.
[Guest]: This is cool.
[Guest]: So it's fascinating to get that aha when you find out that they've removed all the chinks
[Guest]: in what would otherwise be like, why is anybody doing this?
[Guest]: And now it's like, oh, yeah, this is why they're doing it.
[Guest]: So fascinating because of that, perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, there's a lot to unpack here.
[Amit Varma]: But firstly, I'll say that I'm delighted that you brought up that nuclear digression because
[Amit Varma]: something that I have been planning to write about, or maybe find an expert and do an episode
[Amit Varma]: about is that, you know, nuclear power could literally be the solution to climate change,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that it is so incredibly safe, obviously, I don't have your level of knowledge
[Amit Varma]: about thorium deposits in India, which is a kind of geeky thing I'd expect you to know.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I did do a lot of reading on this at one point in time.
[Amit Varma]: And it is, you know, all the data comprehensively shows that it is by far the safest form of
[Amit Varma]: energy 10s of 1000s of people die every year from fossil fuels.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of them are unseen deaths, which we, you know, don't necessarily directly attribute.
[Amit Varma]: But people will bring up this bogey of Chernobyl or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing with Chernobyl is that look, that was not something that you know, necessarily
[Amit Varma]: was a failure of nuclear power.
[Amit Varma]: It was a failure of a certain system of governance, which was really the Soviet system.
[Amit Varma]: And that's how you should see it.
[Amit Varma]: And while the web series is fabulous, I'd recommend a book by Adam Higginbotham on Chernobyl,
[Amit Varma]: which I linked from the show notes, which is a wonderful, wonderful book on that subject.
[Amit Varma]: I also sort of loved your answer on mental models, because you know, you brought up all
[Amit Varma]: these different sports, and I'll kind of mention them briefly, because it seems that the one
[Amit Varma]: way in which my years as a poker player changed my thinking or sharpened my thinking was that
[Amit Varma]: it made me think about the world in a probabilistic way.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, not look and not connect results to outcomes all the time, not be results oriented,
[Amit Varma]: focus more on process and doing the right thing and realize that the role of luck in
[Amit Varma]: our lives is, you know, much greater.
[Amit Varma]: And that is, of course, that kind of probabilistic thinking is a framework that applies to everything,
[Amit Varma]: including investing.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with Mohit Satyananda, mutual friend, who's also an amazing investor, where
[Amit Varma]: we spoke about the similarities between investing and poker in terms of the kind of different
[Amit Varma]: mental models that go in.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you sort of mentioned chess.
[Amit Varma]: Now that's also relevant, because what you do as a chess player is that there was a study
[Amit Varma]: we showed, which compared top chess players with beginning chess players, and tried to
[Amit Varma]: figure out how many moves ahead do they see.
[Amit Varma]: And the beginning chess players see as many moves ahead as the best grandmaster in the
[Amit Varma]: world.
[Amit Varma]: But the top player will see the right moves.
[Amit Varma]: And that is because of pattern recognition.
[Amit Varma]: Because they are not going by, I will do this, he will do that, and then this will happen,
[Amit Varma]: and then this will happen.
[Amit Varma]: That's not how they are thinking.
[Amit Varma]: They are looking at certain patterns of how the pieces are placed on the board.
[Amit Varma]: And from that, they know certain patterns of how things move.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you become better at chess by just by recognizing more and more patterns
[Amit Varma]: and using them.
[Amit Varma]: So you're thinking at a higher level, which might be a reason, by the way, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Sudoku is frustrating to you.
[Amit Varma]: Because in Sudoku, there are no higher patterns.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is move by move, everything is concrete.
[Amit Varma]: You're figuring out, okay, there is no such number in this line, there is no such number
[Amit Varma]: in here, therefore, there are no higher patterns to see, I'm just kind of speculating and thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, I'm now hooked on to this new form of chess on chess.com called fog
[Amit Varma]: of war, which is beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: And what fog of war is that, you know, if anyone has played chess, they should really
[Amit Varma]: try it out.
[Amit Varma]: Is that you can only see your own pieces at the beginning of the game, you can't see your
[Amit Varma]: opponent's pieces.
[Amit Varma]: And as you play, you can only see those parts of the board, which your pieces can attack.
[Amit Varma]: So if you put your bishop on a long diagonal, you can see everything on that diagonal till
[Amit Varma]: the point, you know, it's blocked by something.
[Amit Varma]: So it is, you know, the difference between chess and poker is that chess is a game of
[Amit Varma]: perfect information, while poker obviously is imperfect information.
[Amit Varma]: And this brings that element of imperfect information into chess, where you're not just
[Amit Varma]: trying to kind of, you know, all the information isn't out there.
[Amit Varma]: So part of your task is to figure out how do I get more information?
[Amit Varma]: And how do I protect, you know, information from getting out?
[Amit Varma]: So it's really, it's like a fascinating mix, and I've kind of gone down that rabbit hole
[Amit Varma]: in recent days, I'm probably one of the highest ranked players on chess.com right now in that
[Amit Varma]: form of the game.
[Amit Varma]: Though that is obviously not the case in any other form, because I play all other forms
[Amit Varma]: for time pass, I do not try to improve, I do not want to improve, like what poker players
[Amit Varma]: would call a fish.
[Amit Varma]: But that's what I try to do here.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess that's part of it that if you, you form these mental models doing various
[Amit Varma]: things, and then you can apply them to everything.
[Amit Varma]: And pattern seeking is not something that you do only in chess.
[Amit Varma]: We are pattern seeking creatures, we are sort of evolved to do that, which is why we kind
[Amit Varma]: of look for patterns in everything that I do.
[Amit Varma]: Now, my next question about sort of investing in markets is this.
[Amit Varma]: And this is possibly a prescriptive question, how should we think about markets?
[Amit Varma]: Because from an outsider, someone who doesn't invest, someone who hasn't thought about it
[Amit Varma]: at a higher philosophical level, markets can be either, you know, at the very basic level
[Amit Varma]: that you're buying into a company, and they're using your money and doing something with
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a system.
[Amit Varma]: Or it can be like this grand casino, which is completely disconnected from the real world,
[Amit Varma]: kuch connection hi nahi hai, economy is going down, markets are going up, which of course,
[Amit Varma]: you wrote about in this wonderful column in June, which I'll, again, link from the show
[Amit Varma]: notes and possibly quote from, but people have these very simplistic conceptions of
[Amit Varma]: markets.
[Amit Varma]: So, and I presume at some point, obviously, you begin with these simplistic notions as
[Amit Varma]: well, and then you begin to find out more about it.
[Amit Varma]: So how should we think of markets?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, why should we invest in markets?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how has your thinking kind of how did your thinking rather evolve on the subject?
[Guest]: You know, the problem with markets is that there's always more than one right answer
[Guest]: to almost everything.
[Guest]: And this is something that a lot of people find extremely uncomfortable.
[Guest]: They may be accounting fraud, or snafus that are happening, and yet it may still be a great
[Guest]: company to invest in.
[Guest]: And so this is the one of the things that people always find fascinating.
[Guest]: But there's a lot of stuff like that.
[Guest]: So let me start off with the basic simple assumption.
[Guest]: And perhaps I should, I should paraphrase this with saying this is not advice.
[Guest]: This is, you know, this is just storytelling more than anything else.
[Guest]: So if you think about the most simple advice, pieces of advice that people can give you,
[Guest]: it's just, you know, keep investing and you'll make money.
[Guest]: That's as simple as it sounds, right?
[Guest]: And if you just took that one piece of advice, and nothing else, I think, you know, you do
[Guest]: really well in life.
[Guest]: Because with the hows and the whys and all that stuff can come later.
[Guest]: But this is a really simple piece of advice.
[Guest]: Now things start to get complicated, because you're going to ask me where are you going
[Guest]: to invest?
[Guest]: So I can tell you, oh, well, you can invest in these stocks, these mutual funds, and you
[Guest]: know, out of every 10 people, you'll find one or two people who said, dude, I invested
[Guest]: in that shit.
[Guest]: And then it was really good for a while.
[Guest]: And then all those stocks went to shit, and I lost all my money, and then I'm done.
[Guest]: Okay, that sounds like it.
[Guest]: But that one person is going to influence 10 or 15 other people to say don't invest
[Guest]: in markets, because this is what it is.
[Guest]: And now the confusion starts to creep in.
[Guest]: Now, how do I start off the same way?
[Guest]: I didn't have any money, to be fair, I'll tell you my first experience with stocks.
[Guest]: And I had seen my father make money out of stocks.
[Guest]: He bought Hero Motocorp, Hero Honda at the time, when it was in its IPO, he never sold
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: He never sold it for one reason, because he pledged it to take a loan to build his house.
[Guest]: So he couldn't sell it.
[Guest]: So he took that, those shares are worth, I don't know, 4000 times what they were at the
[Guest]: IPO today.
[Guest]: But the interesting thing about the thing was, although I'd seen this money being made
[Guest]: in stocks, I was like, God, so I, in 2000, February, after looking at stock markets going
[Guest]: up every single day, I decided to venture into markets myself and I stood in line that
[Guest]: time you had to fill paper forms, go in line, so you stood in line and went and invested
[Guest]: in ICICI Prudential Mutual Fund, Technology Fund, something like that.
[Guest]: And it was a 10 rupees and promptly in three months, it was a 2 rupees.
[Guest]: And I said, this is the only money I had ever saved.
[Guest]: I'm running my own business, so all my money is there.
[Guest]: I had 10,000 rupees and I put it into this and it became 2000 rupees and I swore off
[Guest]: markets saying, I don't know how anybody has ever made money off this thing, but once you
[Guest]: go into this accounting thing, I suddenly realized there's a pattern.
[Guest]: There's a way to make money.
[Guest]: And if you think about it in a very basic way, and maybe this realization took me years
[Guest]: to get, but I'm just going to go back in here.
[Guest]: You're making money off the fact that someone else is making money.
[Guest]: You're not going to make money by yourself.
[Guest]: And since I'm not selling the pipes, I'm buying the company's shares, then that company sells
[Guest]: pipes.
[Guest]: The guy who's selling the pipes knows how to sell pipes.
[Guest]: I don't know how to figure that out.
[Guest]: All I need to know is that he's selling pipes and he can continue to sell pipes in the future.
[Guest]: And I think pipes is a great market, so that's all I need to care about.
[Guest]: You think of the markets as in poker or in a game where you're playing in a casino.
[Guest]: The odds are always a little bit against, a little bit.
[Guest]: In poker, it's not.
[Guest]: Of course, poker, when you're playing in a team, you're probably someone with the odds
[Guest]: if you're smart.
[Guest]: And when I say odds, I mean, you can try over and over again.
[Guest]: And if you've got the right kind of process, if all you have is a slight edge, over time
[Guest]: you will win.
[Guest]: There are two reasons why, two things that are very important for this concept to work.
[Guest]: One is that you need to be able to play many times.
[Guest]: That means they shouldn't stop you.
[Guest]: You can give your 12th standard exams only so many times, and that's it.
[Guest]: You can't give it for more than those many times, so you have to win in that short timeframe.
[Guest]: So you need a different approach to it, which is also why it's knowledge-based, rules-based.
[Guest]: Life is not rules-based.
[Guest]: Life is very random to a certain extent.
[Guest]: And therefore, to win in investing, you have to be able to try many times.
[Guest]: What happens to a lot of people is they get taken in by this Rakesh Jhunjhunwala bet some
[Guest]: money on Titan, and that made him 800 crore.
[Guest]: Ek share nahi.
[Guest]: Mereko bhi wo aisa ek share nikal ke do.
[Guest]: To unlearn this took me 10 years.
[Guest]: To unlearn the philosophy that said, boss, bet everything on one thing.
[Guest]: I've done this.
[Guest]: I'm an entrepreneur.
[Guest]: I've bet all my money on my company, and I've had four of them, you know, some different
[Guest]: kinds of success, but I don't think this is great investing advice, that you bet a lot
[Guest]: of money on a single thing.
[Guest]: I don't think it works for me.
[Guest]: And I've realized that over time, investing is about who you are.
[Guest]: If you're this crazy, and you see this in poker a lot, people will come in and say,
[Guest]: boss, iss hand mein toh banayega.
[Guest]: Kuch bhi karega.
[Guest]: Because that hand could be a throwaway hand.
[Guest]: You had to go.
[Guest]: You had to fold.
[Guest]: The guy's going to play on it because of his ego.
[Guest]: So people do this with shares, saying, Suzlon kharidega, and Suzlon mein hi paisa banayega.
[Guest]: Even though he's lost 80% in Suzlon, he's putting more money into it, saying, average
[Guest]: down, average down.
[Guest]: Stock that falls 90% is a stock that first fell 80% and then fell by half.
[Guest]: So if you are thinking it's 80% down, it has nowhere else to go but up.
[Guest]: It's going to fall only another 10% in the overall scheme of things, but 50% for you.
[Guest]: So this is something that I think it takes time for one to learn.
[Guest]: But what is fascinating is the building of why you invest or how you invest.
[Guest]: For me, that learning came in over time, saying, OK, I look at accounts, I look at stock prices,
[Guest]: and they don't make sense.
[Guest]: There's a company that's growing at 10% and you're valuing it at some obscene number.
[Guest]: OK, it doesn't make sense.
[Guest]: Over time, you realize that this is a lot of luck, and luck plays a huge role because
[Guest]: sometimes it's a crappy company.
[Guest]: It gets its share price up to a point where it can raise capital at a very high valuation.
[Guest]: It raises that capital at a very high valuation, and now because that capital is strengthened
[Guest]: because of this capital raise, it suddenly becomes a good company.
[Guest]: I mean, it's still overvalued, but it's a good company that can actually withstand a
[Guest]: fall.
[Guest]: So when there is a fall because it has this capital cushion, it's able to withstand it.
[Guest]: Its competitors are not, which were relatively less priced but did not have the kind of capital
[Guest]: buffers that this guy does.
[Guest]: So it suddenly has those capital buffers, and the increase in stock price made a company
[Guest]: that could ride out a really big downturn.
[Guest]: So this concept never struck me.
[Guest]: I mean, it still astounds me that that happens.
[Guest]: And what you suddenly realize is that when a company starts to raise capital when it's
[Guest]: extremely overvalued, it's actually a good company.
[Guest]: And you need a company to do that, to make for a better thing.
[Guest]: That's very esoteric from an original sphere of things, because you want to look at a company
[Guest]: and say, oh, no debt is good.
[Guest]: No debt companies are good.
[Guest]: In India, they tell you that a company should not have debt.
[Guest]: Yes, there are a lot of no-debt companies, and lots of debt-based companies which are
[Guest]: still good.
[Guest]: And you realize that over time, that it's the judicious use of terms and terminologies
[Guest]: and things that you learn.
[Guest]: And so somebody told you this, probably, and it's underappreciated.
[Guest]: Follow the rules.
[Guest]: And second, figure out when to break the rules.
[Guest]: It's the worst advice you can ever give someone new, because they would have no idea what
[Guest]: that means.
[Guest]: Because first, they have to figure out why those rules work, and then they have to figure
[Guest]: out why those rules don't work, or when those rules don't work.
[Guest]: But the art of investing, if there is an art in it, it is the process of figuring out what
[Guest]: works and what doesn't, and why sometimes some things are different, and sometimes some
[Guest]: things are exactly the same.
[Guest]: And many times in this process, you'll find out that, OK, so let me start with the basics.
[Guest]: You say, OK, the basic advice is invest on a regular basis, and you'll make money.
[Guest]: And then you're doing this for a while, and then suddenly you realize, oh, shit, you know
[Guest]: what?
[Guest]: The market's going up.
[Guest]: Instead of me doing this every month, why don't I just double down every time, just
[Guest]: add more money?
[Guest]: I add more money, and the market keeps going up, and I feel like I'm a genius.
[Guest]: This is happening right now with a lot of people who started six months ago, but it's
[Guest]: happened on every bull cycle in the past.
[Guest]: So when you become a genius, the first thing you do is start telling your friends that
[Guest]: you're a genius, and nowadays it's the WhatsApps and the signals and whatever it is.
[Guest]: And then you form a following of that sort.
[Guest]: And over time, there's a crash at some point, and then you realize you're not a genius and
[Guest]: that this market's going to beat you up, because you'll make the same mistakes that other people
[Guest]: are writing that you're making.
[Guest]: The other people are telling you, listen, don't double down on a stock that's got corporate
[Guest]: governance issues.
[Guest]: And you're like, no, no, no, it's temporary.
[Guest]: The promoter is not really looking to siphon out cash, but he needs money right now.
[Guest]: So that statement is just the worst, most horrible statement ever, because if he's siphoning
[Guest]: out cash, it's probably real.
[Guest]: So then you break it down and say, dude, I won't invest in these stocks at all, ever.
[Guest]: And then somebody comes and tells you, no, there's something called technical analysis,
[Guest]: where you look only at prices.
[Guest]: Forget what the fundament, what the company does.
[Guest]: It doesn't matter.
[Guest]: The price is going up.
[Guest]: You buy it.
[Guest]: If the price is coming down, you sell it.
[Guest]: So there's this famous investor called Sameer Arora, who's pretty active on Twitter, a very
[Guest]: witty saying.
[Guest]: So one of the things is that they tell you the advice is that buy stocks that go up.
[Guest]: If you ask them, what about if it goes down, then don't buy it.
[Guest]: So basically, it's hindsight bias and all that stuff.
[Guest]: But all the logical biases we see in debates and reasoning, the same kind of biases exist
[Guest]: in investing, which is you have hindsight bias.
[Guest]: You look at survivorship.
[Guest]: You say that this strategy worked, because you look back and say, well, if I had done
[Guest]: this to Bajaj Finance, it would have been great.
[Guest]: But you know what?
[Guest]: At the same time that Bajaj Finance was there, the same rule set you used qualified a Suzlon
[Guest]: as well.
[Guest]: So if you put your money half and half in both, well, you might still have made out
[Guest]: like a bandit, but it'll be like a smaller bandit, a bandit without a bandana.
[Guest]: But I mean, these are the things that you learn over time, that these rules that they
[Guest]: quote you are selective, sometimes designed to impress rather than actually be true.
[Guest]: And nobody is entitled, perhaps, to correct advice.
[Guest]: But nobody gives you that, because everybody is colored by their own biases.
[Guest]: The richest of investors today, people whom we admire or see, have to some extent been
[Guest]: shaped by luck.
[Guest]: And the few people that don't recognize that, you should be so wary of them, because giving
[Guest]: gyan is easy, man.
[Guest]: But not recognizing the role of luck in your investing life is a sin.
[Guest]: We're all children of an extremely lucky regime, you know, and in the markets, there's more
[Guest]: luck than anything else.
[Guest]: And to attribute most of it to skill is, you know, like you said, they haven't bluffed
[Amit Varma]: enough.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, or no, or they've made the right bluffs and gotten lucky.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: When we come back, there is again, as always, in everything you say, lots to unpack here.
[Amit Varma]: I want to talk about poker, I want to ask you deeper questions about investing.
[Amit Varma]: But I will begin by talking about cricket to illustrate a central point about investing
[Amit Varma]: in life.
[Amit Varma]: But after a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: As many of you know, I'll soon be coming out with a four volume anthology of the seen and
[Amit Varma]: the unseen books organized around the themes of politics, history, economics, and society
[Amit Varma]: and culture.
[Amit Varma]: These days, I'm wading through over 3 million words of conversation from all my episodes
[Amit Varma]: so far to curate the best bits.
[Amit Varma]: And for this to happen, I needed transcripts.
[Amit Varma]: And that was made possible by a remarkable young startup called tap chief.
[Amit Varma]: tapchief at tapchief.com is a digital platform that allows companies to outsource work to
[Amit Varma]: their network of freelancers.
[Amit Varma]: And tap chiefs network includes more than 125,000 people as of now, you want people
[Amit Varma]: to make your web page or design a logo or compose a jingle or do some digital marketing
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: tapchief gives you an easy way to reach out to freelancers competing for your work.
[Amit Varma]: I can say from first hand experience how valuable this has been for me and solve the problem
[Amit Varma]: I was actually a bit worried about.
[Amit Varma]: So do go over to tapchief.com and check out all that tapchief has to offer.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe they could solve your problem too.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen we are chatting with the multifaceted Deepak
[Amit Varma]: Sinha.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people are as Isaiah Berlin once said, foxes are hedgehogs.
[Amit Varma]: You know, foxes who you know, know a little bit of a vast variety of subjects and hedgehogs
[Amit Varma]: who delve deep into one thing.
[Amit Varma]: But if you have the right models, you can be both a fox and a hedgehog, you can know
[Amit Varma]: a lot about different things.
[Amit Varma]: So I sort of designed this episode not just to talk about investing, which of course Deepak
[Amit Varma]: is the ideal person to speak about that, but also a bunch of other things.
[Amit Varma]: But before I do that, I'll go off on a sort of a little bit of a tangent and come up with
[Amit Varma]: a thought experiment of cricket, which is and I'll explain why it is relevant to my
[Amit Varma]: listeners right after this, which is that let's say that, you know, in a universe where
[Amit Varma]: betting on matches is illegal, let's say there is a series between India and Australia, and
[Amit Varma]: they are going to play say five one day matches, right?
[Amit Varma]: So what you do is you have the database of 1000 punters, and you write to the 1000 punters,
[Amit Varma]: and you say, listen, here's the thing, all these matches are fixed, I know what is going
[Amit Varma]: to happen, I will tell you the result, and you don't need to pay me anything, you can
[Amit Varma]: either choose to bet or not to bet, but I will give you the result in advance you track
[Amit Varma]: what happens, right?
[Amit Varma]: And then you write to 500 of those 1000 guys and say India will win.
[Amit Varma]: And you tell the other half that Australia will win.
[Amit Varma]: So now what will happen is that one of those two sides will win.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, 500 people have just seen that you got the first prediction right.
[Amit Varma]: Then you write to 250 of them and say India will win the second one 250, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And in the end, you will have a bunch of people who will see that you got all five predictions
[Amit Varma]: right.
[Amit Varma]: And what simply happened here, that that particular line of predictions which took you there is
[Amit Varma]: what you can call survivorship bias.
[Amit Varma]: And that also illustrates the role of luck in life that the market is full of many, many
[Amit Varma]: people and many, many funds and, you know, trying all kinds of different strategies.
[Amit Varma]: And the guy who got those five hits, you know, right in a row, obviously, the odds against
[Amit Varma]: anybody getting those five hits in a row are it's incredibly unlikely.
[Amit Varma]: But if everybody's trying all kinds of things, a bunch of people will get those five hits
[Amit Varma]: right in a row just by accident or just by luck, which is not to say that all successful
[Amit Varma]: firms are all successful investors are beneficiaries of the survivorship bias.
[Amit Varma]: But it is a possibility to consider that luck also played a big role in whatever they did.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, of course, one of the biases that you mentioned.
[Amit Varma]: So this sort of thought experiment kind of came to mind because whichever smart punter
[Amit Varma]: tried this, you know, the guys who've seen him get all five right are going to pay him
[Amit Varma]: big money to, you know, for his next prediction.
[Amit Varma]: And even if he gets it wrong, they'll rationalize that because now they're kind of invested
[Amit Varma]: and sunk cost fallacy and all of that rubbish comes into play.
[Amit Varma]: As far as sort of since you had bought a poker, poker is different from other kinds of gambling
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that you're not playing against a house.
[Amit Varma]: You're playing against other players.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, it is a game of skill.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a zero sum game when there is no house involved, when the house takes a little
[Amit Varma]: bit of rake out of every pot.
[Amit Varma]: It's a negative sum game.
[Amit Varma]: But the key point that you mentioned there was bankroll management, like in one of your
[Amit Varma]: other interviews, I saw about how, you know, after your early investing foray, which you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned, you actually put all your savings into VSNL, I think it was, right?
[Guest]: It was, yes, I mean, the first stock that I bought was VSNL, I think, which is actually,
[Guest]: by the way, as I find out very recently, probably a good thing to have done.
[Guest]: But yes.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So the point being there is that bankroll management is incredibly important.
[Amit Varma]: Even proper bankroll management can see you go closer and closer towards getting broke.
[Amit Varma]: So you also have to, in a sense, it would help if you don't have human emotions, if
[Amit Varma]: you can just focus on doing the right thing, because we are also wired with something called
[Amit Varma]: loss aversion, we react more negatively to losses than we do to profits.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, which is, again, a sort of a problematic thing to control.
[Amit Varma]: But the big question that I want to kind of ask you is, oh, by the way, another of these
[Amit Varma]: sort of biases that you mentioned is, you know, and you've mentioned this in previous
[Amit Varma]: interviews also, that what beginning investors will tend to do is if a stock goes down, they
[Amit Varma]: will want to hold on to it because they want to recoup their losses.
[Amit Varma]: But if it goes up a little bit, they'll sell it immediately because oh man, I took profit
[Amit Varma]: banal here, which is entirely the wrong thing to do in poker.
[Amit Varma]: The phrase we use for it is called eating like a bird shitting like an elephant.
[Amit Varma]: So that's kind of what it amounts to.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of similarities.
[Amit Varma]: But the question that I have for you is this that on the one hand, you could say that in
[Amit Varma]: an ideal world, the sort of you look at the fundamentals of a company, the sort of the
[Amit Varma]: Benjamin Graham, Warren Buffett kind of way you look at the fundamentals, you look at
[Amit Varma]: the balance sheet, you make projections into the future and the stock prices based on that.
[Amit Varma]: But then as we know, in the real world, prices are based on supply and demand.
[Amit Varma]: And when it comes to the stock market, it seems to me that they are based a lot on perception.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not just a perception of how the company is doing.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you know the company is shit, you see the stock price going up and you're playing
[Amit Varma]: the greater fool theory that, you know, I might buy it at a high price, but somebody
[Amit Varma]: will buy it at a higher price because hey, after all, it's moving up as Chuck Prince
[Amit Varma]: of Citigroup once said, when the music's playing, you got to keep on dancing.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you know you're in a bubble, it could be profitable for you to remain in the bubble.
[Amit Varma]: And indeed, it could be rational for you to pay irrational prices if you believe that
[Amit Varma]: those prices are going to keep going up.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that becomes a game which is not related to the real world.
[Amit Varma]: Although, you know, George Soros has had once coined the term reflexivity, we're talking
[Amit Varma]: about how perceptions can affect reality and your example of our company with a high share
[Amit Varma]: price can raise capital, which can actually make it a good company and can justify the
[Amit Varma]: share price, which is, you know, seems to me to be a classic example of how perception
[Amit Varma]: can actually sort of change reality.
[Amit Varma]: So it seems to me at one level that one, that's a game.
[Amit Varma]: That's a game where it's not so much anymore about what companies may or may not do.
[Amit Varma]: That's just one factor in it, how our company is doing, how solid are there.
[Amit Varma]: But the other bigger factor is the perceptions of all the other players in the game.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you are, you know, understanding human behavior is as big a skill, if not a
[Amit Varma]: greater skill than understanding balance sheets, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And so how do you approach this?
[Amit Varma]: Do you take this as something that is a given?
[Amit Varma]: And then say that, yes, within this given, there can be different sort of systems to
[Amit Varma]: approach investing?
[Amit Varma]: How has your thinking on this kind of evolved?
[Guest]: So I think this is a very interesting topic, because this comes back to the thing I said,
[Guest]: there is no one right answer, there's many right answers.
[Guest]: And when you start off, you become increasingly militant about your own thought process.
[Guest]: I like value investing, everything else is shit.
[Guest]: You guys don't know what a company is supposed to be worth, you're paying, overpaying for
[Guest]: this and underpaying for that.
[Guest]: And then you realize the most horrible way that perhaps somebody else, you know, grows
[Guest]: richer and richer, despite following the exact opposite strategy that you have.
[Guest]: And you suddenly realize that that's, after some time, you come to realize that many ways
[Guest]: to play the, there are many ways to skin, I don't know who skins cats, but assuming
[Guest]: that some people do, there are many ways to do it.
[Guest]: But here's the thing that you start.
[Guest]: You think of companies as a result of metrics, or they make profits, they should be worth
[Guest]: X amount of profits.
[Guest]: Maybe if I had my money, I could put it in a fixed deposit, it gives me four and a half,
[Guest]: 5% a year.
[Guest]: Therefore, if I put 100 rupees into a fixed deposit, it gives me 5 rupees a year.
[Guest]: Can I find a company that earns 5 rupees if I gave it 100 rupees?
[Guest]: So you look at something called a return on equity, which is a similar metric, and you
[Guest]: say, okay, well, this company earns 20 rupees for every 100 rupees that it has.
[Guest]: It's a fantastic company, better than my fixed deposit, there's some risk, so I'll ask it
[Guest]: to earn 20% or 10%, more than 10.
[Guest]: So it's 20, so it's good.
[Guest]: Then you find out that this company is worth something else.
[Guest]: Now in the 70s, there were these companies called the Nifty 50.
[Guest]: This is not related to our Nifty in India, but they were called the Nifty 50, among them
[Guest]: were very interesting companies, including McDonald's, and at the time, Kodak.
[Guest]: Now Kodak eventually went bankrupt, but you paid a huge amount of money for these extremely
[Guest]: good businesses.
[Guest]: McDonald's is not a bad business at all.
[Guest]: Except 10 years later, the McDonald's price was 70% lower than it was in the 70s when
[Guest]: I talk about this.
[Guest]: So sometimes you overpay for a business, believing that it's a good business, and you will not
[Guest]: make any money on that.
[Guest]: It's like if you paid the price of a Mercedes for a Maruti, you're not going to get a Mercedes
[Guest]: in performance.
[Guest]: You're going to get a Maruti.
[Guest]: And not to, I own Maruti, so I shouldn't say too much, many bad things about it, and don't
[Guest]: own Mercedes.
[Guest]: But here is where the point is that you have to now be a judge of whether what you're paying
[Guest]: is worth it or not.
[Guest]: So valuation and business analysis are two slightly different things.
[Guest]: You come to the conclusion that, okay, I'll pay a certain value for this kind of business.
[Guest]: Then you find out there are certain businesses where you can't value them.
[Guest]: You simply cannot, because you couldn't have imagined the power of an iPhone when the iPhone
[Guest]: came out.
[Guest]: A very few people really thought, they thought it was a bigger iPod.
[Guest]: Oh, you put the internet and the iPod together in one thing, huh, okay, whatever.
[Guest]: But you didn't realize there was a revolution that changed things, and it killed Nokia in
[Guest]: a way that even Nokia couldn't have imagined.
[Guest]: But something fundamental changed about the world, and what's happening now is doing that.
[Guest]: What we don't realize is that in the last, say, 12 to 24 months, we've slowly seen a
[Guest]: change happening, and we have not even acknowledged it.
[Guest]: Restaurants used to deliver.
[Guest]: Now, restaurants in India don't deliver.
[Guest]: You always use Swiggy or Zomato or one of these things for delivery.
[Guest]: And the restaurants themselves don't employ delivery people at all.
[Guest]: The whole delivery workforce of hotels or restaurants, which was perhaps sometimes earlier
[Guest]: part-time postgraduate people, students, and all that stuff, is gone.
[Guest]: That's complete.
[Guest]: That entire model has gone bust.
[Guest]: In the late 90s, there was these things called STD and ISD booths.
[Guest]: If you lose your phone today, there is no way you can make a phone call by paying someone
[Guest]: for it.
[Guest]: You literally have to beg someone for a phone and ask them to give it to you free, and most
[Guest]: of them will because they don't pay anything for the phone call anyways.
[Guest]: But it stuns me that the whole STD, ISD model went to zero, and we didn't even notice when.
[Guest]: And when you see these changes coming in an industry that you could invest in, you might
[Guest]: actually see these nonlinear gains simply because they're not available on those balance
[Guest]: sheets anyway.
[Guest]: They're not available.
[Guest]: They're a function of the future, not of the past.
[Guest]: They're a function of new technology that's coming in and that's going to break everything.
[Guest]: Electric vehicles, for instance.
[Guest]: People say, oh, Tesla is expensive and this, but when you go down to the wire, you actually
[Guest]: find out the electric cars will not sell because they're environmentally friendly.
[Guest]: I don't think many people care.
[Guest]: They will sell because they're cheaper and faster, period.
[Guest]: And that change, if you tell a person, yeah, you know what, I'm going to keep these motorcycle
[Guest]: and stock, these companies, even though they continue to sell gas-based bikes and they
[Guest]: don't have a strategy for electric, because you know what, nobody's going to buy these
[Guest]: environmentally.
[Guest]: This is just a fad.
[Guest]: It's not.
[Guest]: It's actually economically better.
[Guest]: And if you see this as a model, you could have said this four years ago, it would have
[Guest]: been right.
[Guest]: But the last four years, electric hasn't taken off in India in any meaningful way.
[Guest]: You can't see that for the next four.
[Guest]: It's about now trying to judge whether that model comes.
[Guest]: And then if you're involved in a company that does not have an electric footprint of any
[Guest]: sort, then you may be on the losing side of things.
[Guest]: So you have a great balance sheet, Maruti has no debt, it has a lot of cash on the balance
[Guest]: sheet, it has so many cars that are selling, it sells half the number of cars that India
[Guest]: sells every month.
[Guest]: And yet, if it doesn't have a strategy for electric cars, it might just not survive the
[Guest]: next decade.
[Guest]: So things could happen that fast.
[Guest]: So when you're investing, your problem is now no longer like, oh, I can look at the
[Guest]: accounts and figure out what's doing well.
[Guest]: It's also, I have to guess the future and see what's doing well.
[Guest]: And I can't guess what, one of the alternatives to what you talked about in the cricketing
[Guest]: term is happens every day in stocks.
[Guest]: People send you five stocks, saying these five stocks will do well.
[Guest]: Invariably one of them does.
[Guest]: The next day I said, I told you about this stock.
[Guest]: Now I don't even have to wait for that 1000 to trickle down to 20, I can do this to you
[Guest]: every single day and give you five stocks and you'll be thinking, dude, this guy is
[Guest]: a genius.
[Guest]: Every day he identifies a good stock.
[Guest]: But you aren't looking at the fact that I've lost on four of them.
[Guest]: And it's very rare that you are lost on all five.
[Guest]: In those days, you know, I'll stop talking to you, I'll go to the next guy.
[Guest]: But this is how the tips market has been working in India for the longest time.
[Guest]: In times like these when the markets are really hot, you find that, you know, relative newcomers
[Guest]: will come and tell you, listen, I just did this and you know what, the stock's up 45%
[Guest]: in a month.
[Guest]: And this is where, you know, they haven't bluffed enough, they haven't played enough
[Guest]: because they haven't seen the downturn because they're highlighting the wins.
[Guest]: You meet a guy who highlights his losers, that's the guy you want to talk to about investing.
[Guest]: Because he's going to tell you the real lessons that are learned.
[Guest]: Investing is for everyone.
[Guest]: So the mental model that you start moving to when you start investing is this other
[Guest]: part of this philosophy where you say, listen, it's not just the accounts.
[Guest]: It's not just the future bets.
[Guest]: It's also now a role of luck.
[Guest]: Because out of those five things that I pick, which had great accounts and a fantastic future,
[Guest]: only one did well.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: You go back and there's no reason for it.
[Guest]: And then you say, okay, dude, you know what, I have to play the luck cycle, which means
[Guest]: I have to have enough of doors so that opportunity will knock on at least one of them.
[Guest]: Because if you keep just one door, then they could skip it, just look good, I didn't like
[Guest]: the color or whatever.
[Guest]: And you know, so the problem with investing as a whole is that you have to imbibe this
[Guest]: philosophy saying, listen, you're not going to know everything.
[Guest]: And most of the times you'll know nothing.
[Guest]: So it's good to know a lot of little things about a lot of industry sometimes, and a lot
[Guest]: about one industry.
[Guest]: But whatever it is, you got to place multiple bets.
[Guest]: There's a rule by this guy called Larry Hite, famous trader, he says, the two rules.
[Guest]: If you don't bet, you won't win.
[Guest]: Simply means you got to put your money down on something.
[Guest]: But if you lose all your chips, you can't bet.
[Guest]: The idea is you got to play to the extent that you don't lose all your chips.
[Guest]: In poker, you can, because people go all in, and then you either have to bet all in or
[Guest]: walk away.
[Guest]: And at some point, if they keep betting all in, you're going to lose all your chips.
[Guest]: But in markets, you don't have to bet all your chips.
[Guest]: There is no fear in walking away in the middle.
[Guest]: And you know, you can take part profits away from the market at all points in time.
[Guest]: From this, the framework slightly starts to change, saying, look, now you've got to diversify.
[Guest]: You've got to take a bunch of industries that you think will do well, and a bunch of industries
[Guest]: that perhaps have done well.
[Guest]: So I want to look at, say, a cement company, and say, you know what, cement is the most
[Guest]: boring thing in the world, because you take a bunch of limestone and something else and
[Guest]: make something out of it that you can't even import, because by the time you ship it from
[Guest]: China, it turns into stone because of the sea.
[Guest]: So it's got this little local market in India.
[Guest]: So I'm going to bet on the cement player, because you can't, it doesn't have competition
[Guest]: from abroad.
[Guest]: And in India, everybody's a cartel.
[Guest]: We all know that.
[Guest]: But we love it, because we are invested in their shares.
[Guest]: And cement companies will do well.
[Guest]: There's no reason why this same argument doesn't apply to the US.
[Guest]: It's just that in the US, there are a lot more cement companies, perhaps, but they also
[Guest]: don't have these supernormal profit regimes that the current Indian ones do.
[Guest]: So you're going to bet on, say, cement and a couple of players in the cement industry.
[Guest]: But I can't stick to cement, because that may not be the only thing that works.
[Guest]: So I'll buy some steel, and I'll buy some technology, and I'll buy some.
[Guest]: So you're going to now start diversifying into all of this.
[Guest]: Somewhere along the way, you say, dude, I've got, like, 40 companies.
[Guest]: What am I doing?
[Guest]: I don't have time to analyze all of these companies.
[Guest]: And every day, somebody or the other buys a small stake, and then I have to go and figure
[Guest]: out who this guy is, and why is he buying, and why is someone selling to him.
[Guest]: And some news or press release comes saying, we have been awarded a prize.
[Guest]: Now, it's time to even figure out if this is valuable news.
[Guest]: Sometimes it is completely useless, and sometimes it's the news that makes or breaks a company.
[Guest]: When you spend more and more time on a per-company basis, you have diversified too much.
[Guest]: You have 40 or 50 companies.
[Guest]: You say, well, you know what, this doesn't work for me.
[Guest]: Somebody has created something called an index, it's called a Sensex or a Nifty.
[Guest]: They've found the 50 most valuable companies, put it into a bunch, and they've said, listen,
[Guest]: this is the index.
[Guest]: This is what the market is about.
[Guest]: And I'll say, listen, I know that whatever is today's Nifty is not tomorrow's, because
[Guest]: tomorrow some other company may come in.
[Guest]: Why don't I just buy whatever you call the Nifty?
[Guest]: And if you change one company, and Yes Bank goes out, and some new bank comes in, I'm
[Guest]: going to just sell that Yes Bank and buy the new bank, and I'm done.
[Guest]: If I did that, I would reduce my effort of tracking which company to buy.
[Guest]: I don't care if you have cement, steel, technology, cigarettes, anything.
[Guest]: But as long as you have those companies in this index, I own them if they don't.
[Guest]: So that became one philosophy.
[Guest]: And then you take this out, and then you say, why are you buying those 50 companies?
[Guest]: Let us buy it for you.
[Guest]: Just buy one share of me.
[Guest]: And that became the mutual fund that said, oh, I'll pay the mutual fund manager to figure
[Guest]: out which companies are good.
[Guest]: Some of them will just buy an index.
[Guest]: Some of them will say, I'll go beyond the index.
[Guest]: I'll find companies that are great and geniuses, and I am this guy who breathes, lives, and
[Guest]: eats stocks.
[Guest]: I'm this genius.
[Guest]: And I have five stocks, and one of them will do well every day.
[Guest]: And so some people give their money to these tips people.
[Guest]: Some people give money to the mutual funds.
[Guest]: Some people give money to an index fund, they call it.
[Guest]: This is how your training evolves.
[Guest]: Then pretty much after this is the phase where you start getting frustrated, saying, my mutual
[Guest]: funds are crap.
[Guest]: And then somebody tells you that, listen, they're charging too high a fee.
[Guest]: That's why they're bad.
[Guest]: And you're like, why am I paying them so much fees?
[Guest]: Let me do this myself.
[Guest]: I'd go back.
[Guest]: I'd do it myself.
[Guest]: I win a few days.
[Guest]: And like in poker, there is a point at which a sucker is written on your forehead, right?
[Guest]: And everybody goes through that phase once in their life, hopefully only once, many people
[Guest]: many times.
[Guest]: And those people get beaten up by things like, oh, this guy, I've heard a rumor that this
[Guest]: company is going to partner with Tesla, and Tesla has just come to India.
[Guest]: You have to buy this company.
[Guest]: It goes up 9% on one day.
[Guest]: This happened today, so I'm not going to name the stock.
[Guest]: But this company went up 9% in like 10 minutes.
[Guest]: It ended the day down for the day.
[Guest]: So if you went in and said, dude, this is like Tesla, come on, and then you find out
[Guest]: that the news was bullshit, it was rumors and all that stuff.
[Guest]: And so this process then evolves, and you go and give it back to mutual funds, or sometimes
[Guest]: you go find what you're really good at and invest it on your own.
[Guest]: This philosophy, I think, emerges over time.
[Guest]: It's fascinating for me to watch even myself go through this over time.
[Guest]: And I see many people drop off somewhere in the line.
[Guest]: You can see them.
[Guest]: You've gone in.
[Guest]: Like, for instance, right now, you've got a lot of people saying, I have to participate
[Guest]: in the markets.
[Guest]: And after, this is the third time when I'm seeing a crazy raging bull market in front
[Guest]: of my eyes.
[Guest]: And I can tell you that a lot of these people are not coming back when this market tanks
[Guest]: eventually.
[Guest]: It will at some point.
[Guest]: I don't know where it is.
[Guest]: But again, this is, again, a friendly piece of advice is to not listen to bad news, like
[Guest]: this is a bubble, and think of it as a bad thing.
[Guest]: Bubbles are good.
[Guest]: Bubbles make things happen.
[Guest]: Bubbles is what gave us an Uber, and eventually a Swiggy and a Zomato and all of that stuff.
[Guest]: So I thank bubbles for all their work.
[Guest]: And really, it gave us what Indian stock markets are eventually fascinating, a lot to unpack
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the one reason I have never, I've stayed away from investing is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I try not to get too deep into something about which I don't have too much knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: So my point is, you know, before I got into poker, study it a lot.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, you learn along the way.
[Amit Varma]: For investing, I just thought that I'm not going to invest my money in stock markets,
[Amit Varma]: because I simply don't know enough.
[Amit Varma]: And also, for most of my life, I haven't even had the money to invest, but that's a different
[Amit Varma]: matter.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't want to do it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, obviously, a lot of what you said kind of underscores that because there are so many
[Amit Varma]: factors that goes into how a stock is priced.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, first of all, there's no correct or wrong price, it's all there's a, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's an interplay between the real world, how things actually are, and how companies
[Amit Varma]: are doing.
[Amit Varma]: It's an interplay between the future, which is full of, you know, unknown unknowns, and
[Amit Varma]: also with how people perceive the real world and how people perceive the future.
[Amit Varma]: And it's all dreadfully complex, which is why a point that you have also made earlier
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, never mock another system, you might have one system for investing, there
[Amit Varma]: might be another system which is doing well, have the epistemic humility that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are all kinds of things going around.
[Amit Varma]: And if what works for you works for you, that's great.
[Amit Varma]: But don't go too much into, you know, don't diss other ways.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I think of you could, it also goes back to the parable of different blind people
[Amit Varma]: feeling different parts of an elephant in describing it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, from this complexity, and the humility within us that it should lead to, there are
[Amit Varma]: three broad directions I want to kind of go in.
[Amit Varma]: And the first of those directions is the role of machine learning, or, you know, algorithmic
[Amit Varma]: trading, which you did at a point in time, where, you know, it like, the one thing that
[Amit Varma]: strikes me is that the market is too complex, and all the movements and everything are too
[Amit Varma]: complex for humans to figure out with our primitive brains, which are very advanced
[Amit Varma]: in other ways, but in certain ways are very primitive.
[Amit Varma]: And machines can do that better.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I had Professor Vasant Dhar on this episode recently, he teaches in Stern School
[Amit Varma]: of Business in New York.
[Amit Varma]: So I had an episode with him called Brave New World, I'm also producing a podcast for
[Amit Varma]: him called Brave New World, I think, episode four should be out this week.
[Amit Varma]: And he started an algorithmic trading firm in New York in the 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: And he was talking about how, you know, it would come up with all kinds of counterintuitive
[Amit Varma]: things, insights, which they would not understand.
[Amit Varma]: But when they tried to sort of run simulations, where they will use their own judgment, and
[Amit Varma]: the machine will do something they always lost to the machine.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I wanted to kind of explore this with you.
[Amit Varma]: Because initially, whenever we deal with machines in any way, we think that, okay, we are the
[Amit Varma]: masters, we will program the machine, the machine will do what it does, but we know
[Amit Varma]: better.
[Amit Varma]: And at some point, we realized that, you know, good machine learning is just way ahead, like
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode with a mutual friend, Devanshu Dutta, two or three years ago on AlphaZero,
[Amit Varma]: the chess program that came out.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason it was so mind blowing, what AlphaZero basically did was that you didn't
[Amit Varma]: need to program it like other chess computers with heuristics and with judgments and openings
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: It just played against itself a few million times and learned the game and created its
[Amit Varma]: own heuristics and then destroyed the best computer in the world, which was way stronger
[Amit Varma]: than the best player in the world, simply destroyed it.
[Amit Varma]: And it destroyed it, not by brute force, like Stockfish, which was a machine that it beat,
[Amit Varma]: was doing millions of simulations, you know, per minute, and this was maybe doing 100,000.
[Amit Varma]: But it by playing itself endlessly, it figured out heuristics, which were often contrary
[Amit Varma]: to what human chess players had figured out over 300 years of the game, you know, in the
[Amit Varma]: ways that we value initiative vis-a-vis material and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that, you know, so in your, what was your process like of getting into
[Amit Varma]: algorithmic trading?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, were there times where, you know, you would reflexively react against
[Amit Varma]: a counterintuitive kind of inputs coming at you from the machine or from the software,
[Amit Varma]: but then realizing that there was something it was doing right, which you couldn't fathom.
[Amit Varma]: And also is, tell me a little bit about momentum trading, because that's something that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you worked in for a while, and I would assume that that would be something that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, emerges out of using AI like this, because the AI is much better place to process
[Amit Varma]: all the data that you need to for that.
[Guest]: It's interesting that you bring both these things up, because I think there's a little
[Guest]: bit of a difference between that.
[Guest]: So algorithmic trading is, let's say, there's two areas to it.
[Guest]: So one is, I want to find opportunities to invest in the market.
[Guest]: And one of the reasons why I want to find opportunities, because, okay, I mean, I want
[Guest]: a rule-based system.
[Guest]: And give me a set of data, I'll find the rules that pattern match that data.
[Guest]: And then I will say, okay, when this happens, I'm going to do this.
[Guest]: So a simple thought process is if I take an average, a 10-day average of prices, and let
[Guest]: me do a simple heuristic rule that says when the price crosses from below that 10-day average,
[Guest]: because my price could have gone down and below, and it goes back up, I'm going to buy
[Guest]: the stock, because I expect it to go further up.
[Guest]: And then maybe at some point when it crosses down below its average again, I'm going to
[Guest]: sell it.
[Guest]: This is called a moving average crossover strategy.
[Guest]: So it's an algorithmic strategy that you can say is a rule.
[Guest]: And now because it doesn't matter which company this is, it could be this company, it could
[Guest]: be a hundred other companies, all of them have a price.
[Guest]: Like aloo has a price, onion has a price, aloo will be different from onion, but both
[Guest]: prices are prices.
[Guest]: Over time, you have prices going up or prices going down.
[Guest]: If I map the prices, I can tell you when this aloo price is likely to go up, and again probabilistically.
[Guest]: So the algorithmic trading sometimes says, listen, use the price itself or some objective
[Guest]: factor, not subjective factor, to determine what will come next.
[Guest]: So in a way, it's a short-term prediction.
[Guest]: But the difference between the prediction is you don't have to be right all the time.
[Guest]: You don't even have to be right like 80% of the time.
[Guest]: If you're right 51% of the time and you do enough, you will win.
[Guest]: Sometimes you have to be right only 10% of the time, and you can be enough.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you, that's the venture capital model, where they say we'll put our money
[Guest]: into 10 different companies, and nine of them can go bust, but that one will give me a hundred
[Guest]: x return.
[Guest]: And if that one gives me a hundred x return, I earn 10 x on my fund.
[Guest]: And all I need to find is enough bets.
[Guest]: So I have a 10% win rate.
[Guest]: But the odds for me are 100 is to 1 when I win, and 0 when I lose.
[Guest]: So technically, even a 0.1% bet edge is enough.
[Guest]: Not 0.1.
[Guest]: It's 0.1 into 100 times is 10.
[Guest]: So if I had 100 rupees, I put 10 rupees on each of the 100, on 10 companies.
[Guest]: And every time I won, it was 100 times what I invested.
[Guest]: So my 10 would become 1,000.
[Guest]: So I'd get more than the 100 I invested.
[Guest]: What if I invested in 100 different companies?
[Guest]: If I invested in 100 different companies, I would then break even if even one of them
[Guest]: gave me 100 x.
[Guest]: So then you find the situation where your edge works for you.
[Guest]: This is the edge, right?
[Guest]: So you can program this.
[Guest]: You could call this an algorithmic strategy where now you're using heuristics, moving
[Guest]: average.
[Guest]: I want to try which.
[Guest]: So which moving average should I use?
[Guest]: Should I use a 10-day, a 10-hour, a 40-hour?
[Guest]: Let the computer go figure it out.
[Guest]: I will tell you that I'm going to use a moving average strategy.
[Guest]: So do you find out which moving average actually works in the data that I've given you?
[Guest]: Now you could have something called a curve-fitting process where you say, I've given you three
[Guest]: years of data.
[Guest]: Please tell me that the 37th day average is the best, or if you told me that the 37-day
[Guest]: average is the best.
[Guest]: But now it could be that the next three years, I see horrible results on this strategy when
[Guest]: I actually run it with money.
[Guest]: There's a reason for that is because I've used the data that was best on a certain time
[Guest]: frame, but not perhaps best overall.
[Guest]: So I'll test this in other time frames, saying for the last three years, this has done well.
[Guest]: But maybe three years before that, had I used 37, what would I have got?
[Guest]: And that was something slightly different.
[Guest]: And then do I lose too much when that happens, or is my winnings very different?
[Guest]: So if the answer is no, then I can use that model.
[Guest]: If the answer is yes, that means I have got something called overfitting.
[Guest]: So I have to use a different strategy.
[Guest]: Sometimes this strategy completely fails because it becomes public.
[Guest]: There was a public experiment called the turtles.
[Guest]: They're very interesting.
[Guest]: This is from the movie Trading Places, which originally was Eddie Murphy and a bunch of
[Guest]: guys.
[Guest]: There were two guys.
[Guest]: I forget the other guy's name.
[Guest]: One guy was called Richard Dennis, very famous guy, he was a Republican supporter at the
[Guest]: time.
[Guest]: Nowadays, it's a bad thing to be called a Republican supporter, I guess.
[Guest]: But interestingly, what happened that time was he had an argument with his friend.
[Guest]: He said, that guy said, listen, it takes art to invest well.
[Guest]: So this guy said, no, it's skill.
[Guest]: Richard Dennis said, it's skill.
[Guest]: It's not art.
[Guest]: It is a rule-based game.
[Guest]: So they disagreed.
[Guest]: They said, listen, let's do a bet.
[Guest]: And he says, yes, I'll do you this bet.
[Guest]: I will train traders like they breed turtles in Singapore, which is in a farm.
[Guest]: You just put them into a cage and then they breed them.
[Guest]: So he put out an advertisement saying, listen, if you don't have a trading or a finance background,
[Guest]: that's even better.
[Guest]: I want you to come and I'll train you and I'll help you learn how to trade.
[Guest]: And you're going to trade my money.
[Guest]: So he called these people, literally picked them off the street, gave them a set of rules
[Guest]: and said, this is all you're going to do.
[Guest]: Those rules made a lot of money.
[Guest]: Until I think from 1980 something to 1992, these people made truckloads of money for
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: They went around, some of them became very famous traders by themselves.
[Guest]: One of them is writing books and a bunch of things now and also has been a successful
[Guest]: trader.
[Guest]: So interestingly, after 92, they actually published this in a book.
[Guest]: And since then, the rules stopped working because enough people had figured out that
[Guest]: you could put this into an algorithm.
[Guest]: And then once you have enough people playing the game, then you don't have enough money
[Guest]: left in the game.
[Guest]: So sometimes the rules will change because people have either figured them out, the markets
[Guest]: have figured them out, things are changing.
[Guest]: So when you write a program in algorithmic trading, you're going to have to incorporate
[Guest]: all of these curve fitting, backtesting, how you're going to test, how you're going to
[Guest]: get real data because a company's price can be 50 today, it can suddenly fall to 10 rupees
[Guest]: tomorrow.
[Guest]: So do you know that it's actually fallen 80% or is it a stock split of one is to five that's
[Guest]: caused the price to fall?
[Guest]: So you need somebody to go and adjust that data and make sure that the data is clean.
[Guest]: This part of this process is another part.
[Guest]: So we figured over through the school of hard knocks, perhaps, that things aren't exactly
[Guest]: the way they seem.
[Guest]: So you have to fix the data, you have to write the algorithm, you have to ensure that you're
[Guest]: not doing survivorship bias, curve fitting.
[Guest]: You also have these loss aversion problems in algorithmic systems.
[Guest]: So you can design a system that's great, like this concept of VCs, where you lose on nine
[Guest]: companies but win on only one, it takes a different mentality.
[Guest]: Imagine losing nine consecutive times before that one big winner, you'd have given lost
[Guest]: hearts somewhere.
[Guest]: And if you have this concept, the loss aversion might end up saying, because in the stock
[Guest]: market, you can get out anytime you want, right, you just put a sell order in your own.
[Guest]: That's equivalent to folding your hand and taking your chips and walking away.
[Guest]: So you could quit just before the stock just breaks out and gives you 100 bucks, 100x return,
[Guest]: and you'd have missed all of it.
[Guest]: So you have to build that algorithm in a way that does not give you nine consecutive losses,
[Guest]: unless that's the kind of person you are and you can handle it.
[Guest]: So you find out what somebody calls their uncle point.
[Guest]: It's the point at which you call your uncle for help.
[Guest]: So you find out what your uncle point is, like if I've lost 30% of my money, is that
[Guest]: my uncle point?
[Guest]: And then I don't want to lose 30%.
[Guest]: So find anything that corresponds to a less than 30% loss on my overall portfolio.
[Guest]: And so I'm going to find systems that work, but that work with a less than 30% loss in
[Guest]: the interim, before I started to make money.
[Guest]: So I'm going to make these bets based on these programs.
[Guest]: But this is still a heuristic based logic, you may use computers to do back tests, you
[Guest]: may use, but still heuristic based, you're giving it the rules, and it's kind of testing
[Guest]: the rules and implementing them and then saying, listen, you're running this rule, I'm going
[Guest]: to run according to this rule set.
[Guest]: What if you went one step ahead and said, I don't know the rules.
[Guest]: Dear computer, please go and figure out what rules work.
[Guest]: And then you might find that the computer throws out some very strange things at you.
[Guest]: And this has happened to me a lot.
[Guest]: So for instance, the natural tendency that when people see a stock hitting a new high
[Guest]: has been always and this is regardless of, it's going to fall, because it's run up too
[Guest]: much.
[Guest]: How can you buy at this price?
[Guest]: And I've come to the point where my mind now says, if it's going up, okay, think of it
[Guest]: in a way you buy a stock because its stock price will go up.
[Guest]: This is precisely what it has done.
[Guest]: And so why are you penalizing it by not buying any more of it or by selling it or by not
[Guest]: buying a stock that's making a new high because it's doing exactly what it's supposed to do.
[Guest]: It's supposed to go where no man has gone before and or woman for that matter.
[Guest]: And you know, if it's there, why aren't you buying it?
[Guest]: The answer usually is counterintuitive because we don't, this is where momentum also comes
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: But I come to momentum at a later point, talk about ML, machine learning, the machine can
[Guest]: go in and figure out what actually made sense was to buy stocks, which are making new highs
[Guest]: and buy a lot of these stocks.
[Guest]: And you might look at this and say, this is so counterintuitive.
[Guest]: Why would I buy these stocks?
[Guest]: The answer seems to be that yes, new high.
[Guest]: Now you can go back and justify it.
[Guest]: I can tell you that if a stock is making new highs, you know what's happening is that,
[Guest]: you know, it probably made a high at some point, then it fell.
[Guest]: There are people who bought at that high who have that same loss aversion problem.
[Guest]: They don't want to sell on the way down, but their mind is, when it comes back to this
[Guest]: price, I'll get out and I'll get it even.
[Guest]: So the price goes back there, they sell, the price maybe corrects a little more and then
[Guest]: comes back further up.
[Guest]: So it has gone beyond the point where the last guys who bought at the last high have,
[Guest]: you know, kind of decided to sell and get out at even.
[Guest]: When it crosses that level, you have uncharted territory.
[Guest]: You have people who are buying, who literally are saying the price is going even further
[Guest]: from this because it's never even, and it's never even been here before.
[Guest]: So the logic here is that only stocks that are making new great things tend to be here
[Guest]: at a point where nobody has bought it earlier.
[Guest]: And if you build a portfolio of such stocks, the odds that you will make much more than
[Guest]: you lose.
[Guest]: And when do you lose?
[Guest]: You lose when perhaps when a stock kind of corrects more than 10%.
[Guest]: So if you went and did an ML algorithm, you might find that this is one of the counterintuitive
[Guest]: things that it does, or you could discover a completely new thing where you don't even
[Guest]: know what it is using to decide because the intermediate structure that it has figured
[Guest]: out of what makes or breaks stock is in a format that is incomprehensible to you.
[Guest]: Now, it's like saying, if I wanted to, okay, this is probably more true than anything else,
[Guest]: but apparently recently there has been an attempt to make a translator, a universal
[Guest]: translator.
[Guest]: A universal translator would be where you could give in a lot of languages and it would
[Guest]: be able to translate all of those languages to any other language.
[Guest]: Give it, let it learn, let the machine learn on its own.
[Guest]: So apparently one such test, and I don't know how to, this is a friend who told me this
[Guest]: and he's pretty knowledgeable in this subject, but he says, Deepak, they went in and then
[Guest]: they built this thing, they trained it, they put so much machinery behind it that it was
[Guest]: a multi-machine system, so you could have a hundred machines doing the same kind of
[Guest]: processing.
[Guest]: Eventually, this machine figured out that they could take any language and break it
[Guest]: into this intermediate language that it had, then if you use that intermediate language
[Guest]: to translate into any other language.
[Guest]: So the machine figured this out, right?
[Guest]: And then there were multiple machines, and when they start transmitting this intermediate
[Guest]: language bytes to each other, these guys realized that, holy shit, they're talking to each other,
[Guest]: they're computers, they're talking to each other in a language we don't understand.
[Amit Varma]: We have no idea what they're saying to each other.
[Guest]: They shut it down.
[Guest]: And this is like the Silicon Valley theme thing and all that, but it's true that eventually
[Guest]: stuff will happen that is downright scary, and it's already scary for many of us.
[Guest]: I mean, I could say, sometimes I just say, okay, and my phone says, hi, what did you
[Guest]: just say?
[Guest]: Because it's looking for, okay, Google or something like that.
[Guest]: So the problem really is that you don't know right now how much things are happening without
[Guest]: even the heuristics of a human are leading it.
[Guest]: It could be the machines that, and I'm not afraid of it, and I know that it's eventually
[Guest]: going to happen, but it's amazing how far this can get, and this can get there in computers
[Guest]: as well, where they've kind of figured it out.
[Guest]: In the end, dude, whatever you do, all you'll do is either make me money or lose money,
[Guest]: and I can control that.
[Guest]: I can shut you down when you're losing me too much money.
[Guest]: So in the algorithmic world, they said, go ahead, go do whatever the hell you want.
[Guest]: You want to build an intermediate language, you want to analyze Twitter feeds and figure
[Guest]: out which stock is going to move tomorrow, go ahead and do it.
[Guest]: So ML over there is basically saying our older ways of judgment.
[Guest]: Now, what's interesting is that George Soros thing of reflexivity.
[Guest]: The more people that use algorithms to determine a certain pattern, the more likely it is that
[Guest]: if I know that this is the pattern you're going to recognize, that I can write a program
[Guest]: to beat that.
[Guest]: It effectively means that I could build my machine, which is entirely built to beat your
[Guest]: machine.
[Guest]: It's not meant to beat you, but all I have to know that there's an, I'll give you an
[Guest]: example of this.
[Guest]: There's an algorithm written in the U.S. for people who want to sell a large number of
[Guest]: stocks.
[Guest]: Because if I have like 10 million shares of some company to sell, I am not going to be
[Guest]: able to sell them because the minute I start telling my broker, I need to sell these shares,
[Guest]: the broker's going to tell all his clients, dump this because this Deepak Chennai is selling
[Guest]: 10 million shares of it, and before I sell all of his, I want you to get out because
[Guest]: he's going to destroy the price.
[Guest]: So I don't want him to front run it.
[Guest]: So I get a terminal of my own and start putting orders.
[Guest]: And if I start, I suddenly realized that I can't do this because it's too much time.
[Guest]: I buy a computer algorithm and one of the algorithms that did this was to sell shares
[Guest]: at odd intervals, it would send 100 shares at a time, at even intervals it would send
[Guest]: 500.
[Guest]: So it would rotate between 100, 500, 100, 500.
[Guest]: There was a computer program written to just detect this pattern of 100 and 500 so that
[Guest]: they could game it.
[Guest]: So finance is evil, okay, and we have no idea how evil because I can tell you that there
[Guest]: are no morals and no scruples in this industry.
[Guest]: So people will do this if they were widows and orphans involved because they don't care.
[Guest]: And we've seen this in Enron, a bunch of these things, but these are legit programs.
[Guest]: And they were written with that particular philosophy of saying, my only job is to zip
[Guest]: the other guy.
[Guest]: And so you get the machine learning on the machine learning kind of algorithms as well.
[Guest]: So it can get quite deep in that.
[Guest]: What we figured out is, listen, we don't want to do all of that stuff.
[Guest]: Not because it's a very complex argument of why, but I think what makes sense and a lot
[Guest]: of sense to people is because when you do something that is algorithmic, very high frequency
[Guest]: and all of that stuff, you introduce layers of taxation, layers of, you know, economic
[Guest]: value, transaction costs, and all of that stuff that kind of hurt a person's return.
[Guest]: Managing money for somebody else, you want a strategy that doesn't trade too much, but
[Guest]: also at the same time has some kind of system behind it.
[Guest]: If I follow the system consistently over time, I will make enough money.
[Guest]: Sometimes it's the algorithm, the way the algorithm is accepted, the momentum is one
[Guest]: of these things which have this weird problem that people don't seem to understand it.
[Guest]: It's very counterintuitive.
[Guest]: Like I said, a stock making a new high is in momentum and you should buy it.
[Guest]: Why should you buy it?
[Guest]: Because if you look at the system and test it backwards, the odds of winning or how much
[Guest]: you make when you win is higher if you have the right strategy than how much you lose
[Guest]: when you lose.
[Guest]: And the strategy is simple.
[Guest]: Just keep buying the highest momentum stocks.
[Guest]: When the stock loses momentum, replace it with one that has a higher momentum.
[Guest]: So over time, if your edge here is that, if there's no edge, it's 50-50, let's say.
[Guest]: But you still make more when you win than you lose when you lose.
[Guest]: At the extreme, you can only lose 100% of what you put in a stock, but you can make
[Guest]: 300%.
[Guest]: So if you only had binary win or lose, all you needed is a few winners and you would
[Guest]: still make more money than you lose because you can win more than 2x or more than 1x when
[Guest]: you win.
[Guest]: So momentum is simply that embodied into a strategy where it says, I will discover which
[Guest]: stocks are moving and they are more likely to give me outsized returns.
[Guest]: Not more likely to win, but to give me outsized returns and the losses are controlled because
[Guest]: I get out when they lose momentum.
[Guest]: So when they lose momentum, they would have lost only 10% or 15%, but when they win, they
[Guest]: give me 40-50%.
[Guest]: On average, over a long period of time, I will make money.
[Guest]: This is a very simple philosophy and we know what we call indexes are embodiments of momentum
[Guest]: in a different way.
[Guest]: What are our biggest stocks?
[Guest]: In India today, the biggest stocks are Reliance, TCS, HDFC, HDFC Bank.
[Guest]: 20 years ago, there was still Reliance, but there was no TCS.
[Guest]: There was probably Hindustan Unilever, which was one of the top most stocks.
[Guest]: So why did they change over time?
[Guest]: The answer is that the market capitalization of these stocks changed.
[Guest]: Now an inferior TCS weren't the top market cap stocks at about 20 years ago.
[Guest]: They may be so today.
[Guest]: So over time, the momentum in market cap made them as part of this index.
[Guest]: Reliance is the highest market cap stock today, but five or six years ago, it was TCS.
[Guest]: If you look at the US, Amazon or Apple have shared the mantle of the highest market cap
[Guest]: stock.
[Guest]: 20 years ago, it was Exxon, and 20 years before that, it was something else.
[Guest]: So the leaders have changed, but what has happened really is that each of them has had
[Guest]: momentum in market cap.
[Guest]: The total number of shares they own multiplied by their stock price is the market cap.
[Guest]: The company, the most valuable companies have floated to the top.
[Guest]: So you've taken a moment, and this is there everywhere.
[Guest]: If Virat Kohli is in form, it's a form of momentum.
[Guest]: It means that it makes sense to bet on him on every subsequent match simply because he's
[Guest]: in form.
[Guest]: And sometimes being in form itself is a factor.
[Guest]: It's a reflexive factor.
[Guest]: If you are in form, you have confidence.
[Guest]: If you have confidence, the chances that you will get unnerved when something bad happens
[Guest]: to you is slightly lesser.
[Guest]: One good ball, and that confidence starts to show in your batting, in subsequent things.
[Guest]: Your shoulders droop a little bit lesser, you stand up a little bit straighter, you
[Guest]: get your stance a little bit better, you're less nervous.
[Guest]: That contributes to your playing better, and that increases your form again.
[Guest]: So the form kind of positive feedbacks itself and leads you on.
[Guest]: The same thing happens to a company.
[Guest]: Company does well.
[Guest]: Its customers look and say, your stock is doing really well.
[Guest]: And you're looking at them and saying, our stock is doing really well, we'll give you
[Guest]: more money.
[Guest]: So he gets more money.
[Guest]: Obviously, people say, dude, the stock is good because the stock price is going up because
[Guest]: the company is making more money.
[Guest]: But nobody says the company's making more money because the stock price is going up.
[Guest]: And that factor, it's not sexy.
[Guest]: So people don't like to say it, but sometimes that adds to it.
[Guest]: It's the form that adds to form.
[Guest]: It's the momentum that adds to business sometimes, which is also another layer why businesses
[Guest]: that are in great momentum in the stock market sometimes have an irrationally good effect
[Guest]: on their underlying business potential as well.
[Guest]: So this strategy, of course, I justify it in hindsight, perhaps.
[Guest]: And though I'm not the first person there, the momentum has been a thing that's happening
[Guest]: forever.
[Guest]: I say it like my kids love Formula One.
[Guest]: I used to love Formula One.
[Guest]: I still like Formula One a lot, but I don't have the patience to sit through three hours
[Guest]: of car race as much as I did when I was younger.
[Guest]: But when I was younger, it was Michael Schumacher and Ferrari.
[Guest]: So I have this fond love for Ferrari.
[Guest]: And I keep saying this to other people, saying, I love Ferrari.
[Guest]: So I ask my kids, why don't you like Ferrari?
[Guest]: Why do you like this Lewis Hamilton of Mercedes?
[Guest]: They say, because he wins.
[Guest]: And that's the answer.
[Guest]: The momentum.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, everything you said is very fascinating, and I'll unpack different parts of it.
[Amit Varma]: But I'll throw in a couple of minor disagreements with the things that you said right at the
[Amit Varma]: end.
[Amit Varma]: For example, with sports, I think, you know, I've seen studies that people form sporting
[Amit Varma]: loyalties towards those teams or individuals who are doing well when they are at a certain
[Amit Varma]: age when they are beginning to follow a sport, maybe 13, 14, or maybe later when they begin
[Amit Varma]: to follow something.
[Amit Varma]: So it's natural that, you know, you would remember Schumacher and Ferrari fondly and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and just from seeing who's an Arsenal fan, I can make out how old they are.
[Amit Varma]: Because it means that, you know, those were Arsenal's peak years under Arsene Wenger.
[Amit Varma]: And that is why, you know, today, you know, you might have people liking different teams.
[Amit Varma]: So why Indians would, you know, have such a hardcore loyalty for these British football
[Amit Varma]: teams completely baffles me.
[Amit Varma]: As far as momentum is concerned, I'd actually say cricket and sports is the wrong example
[Amit Varma]: to use.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think when we talk of form, and when we talk of momentum in sport, you are
[Amit Varma]: absolutely right about your domain.
[Amit Varma]: But in sport, when we talk about it, I think we are often imposing narratives in hindsight,
[Amit Varma]: that in hindsight, we can look back and say, ki haan yaar yeh form mein tha.
[Amit Varma]: And we define that period by when it ended.
[Amit Varma]: But that is a narrative in hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: In the moment, there's really no such thing, which is why, you know, the sports illustrated
[Amit Varma]: jinx comes up.
[Amit Varma]: The sports illustrated jinx, of course, is that, you know, the moment you put someone
[Amit Varma]: on the cover of sports illustrated, their career goes downwards.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason it happens is that, you know, they were on a lucky streak at that time,
[Amit Varma]: which you could ascribe to form or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And you basically put them on the cover when they were at their peak, and then there was
[Amit Varma]: a regression to the mean.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, it appeared that that is a curse, and it isn't.
[Guest]: Yeah, in fact, I've limited let me tell you that, in fact, that is exactly what it isn't.
[Guest]: The reason why I'm saying it's not different is because we call we have something called
[Guest]: loyalties, which is stupid, in a momentum theory, you have no loyalties, you have only
[Guest]: loyalties to momentum, which means I will go so I will go with the Roger Federer as
[Guest]: long as he's winning.
[Guest]: And sometimes he's winning because he's winning.
[Guest]: I don't care.
[Guest]: I form no loyalties to tomorrow, he gets beaten by Nadal, I will go to Nadal, if he gets beaten
[Guest]: by the next guy.
[Guest]: Sometimes I don't know who the new latest players are in the first place.
[Guest]: But let's say somebody else comes in and there was a time I was a big Boris Becker fan.
[Guest]: I was an Ivan Lendl fan.
[Guest]: And to be fair, I was more an Ivan Lendl fan than a Boris Becker fan.
[Guest]: But that didn't work out quite as well.
[Guest]: And I was a big Steffi Graf fan and big Serena Williams fan.
[Guest]: But in tennis, I found it easy to kind of not have loyalties.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, since you bring up tennis players of that era, I remember, I once saw this interview
[Amit Varma]: when Jim Courier was doing really well, he won a couple of Grand Slam tournaments.
[Amit Varma]: And at that time, Pete Sampras had just become number one in the world, but hadn't yet won
[Amit Varma]: his first Grand Slam tournament, which I think was a US Open, which he went on to win.
[Amit Varma]: So Courier was asked that you are winning all these Grand Slams, but you know, Sampras
[Amit Varma]: is world number one.
[Amit Varma]: He said world number one doesn't matter, tell him to win some Grand Slams first.
[Amit Varma]: And then I think Sampras won the very next one.
[Amit Varma]: And then history just unfolded.
[Amit Varma]: My sort of clarification to the whole momentum thing is, is it the case that humans are basically
[Amit Varma]: you know, the anchoring effect takes place, that you see a stock at a particular point,
[Amit Varma]: say it's 100 rupees, it goes to 110, you are anchored to the 100.
[Amit Varma]: So in relative to that 110 seems high, and you're like, might as well sell now, while
[Amit Varma]: actually it doesn't matter that every single time you look at a stock, you should do a
[Amit Varma]: clean reset in your head.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, not refer to previous prices, but in fact, refer to previous trends like
[Amit Varma]: the momentum.
[Amit Varma]: And what you're saying is that that is more indicative of what is going to happen to the
[Amit Varma]: stock tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: And if that momentum is an upward momentum, then just speaking of probabilities, it is
[Amit Varma]: likelier to go up than to go down and vice versa.
[Guest]: Is that?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So interesting, you know, you bring that up, because this is actually one of the biggest
[Guest]: problems that you have, as a trader yourself, you will buy a stock at 100, and you sell
[Guest]: it at 120.
[Guest]: This is a curse.
[Guest]: Because you've made this 20 rupees and you're damn good with yourself, but I'll tell you
[Guest]: why it's a curse.
[Guest]: Because let's say the stock falls back to 90, you are thinking of yourself as this hero.
[Guest]: Boss, I bought it at 100, I sold it at 120, I am the boss and all that.
[Guest]: And then it goes back to 130.
[Guest]: You are going to literally kill yourself before you buy that stock again.
[Guest]: Because you're thinking, I sold it at 130, I sold it at 120.
[Guest]: Mentally, your mind is telling you, were you wrong to sell at 120?
[Guest]: But your mind is also telling you, but you were right, it went to 90, you know, it'll
[Guest]: go back to 90.
[Guest]: That time you buy it again.
[Guest]: This is your mind playing tricks on you, and your mind thinking that it's a reversal to
[Guest]: mean kind of happening, but it's not.
[Guest]: And what happens here is that 130 stock goes to 200 rupees, and you kill yourself.
[Guest]: Not because you didn't buy it at 130, because you didn't buy it at 140, you didn't buy it
[Guest]: at 150, you didn't buy it at 160.
[Guest]: And any of those times, if you had bought it, you would have still made enough returns
[Guest]: to be proud of.
[Guest]: But you didn't, because you were fascinated, like you said, the anchoring effect of that
[Guest]: 120.
[Guest]: It's not the 120 price that was existing, it was the point that you had sold at 120
[Guest]: after buying at 100.
[Guest]: So you were the hero, how can you not be the hero to give up and say, buy it back at 130?
[Guest]: This is usually where it kills a lot of people, especially value investors, where you're looking
[Guest]: at this Benjamin Graham kind of value thing, and you can't be wrong, I mean, you find it
[Guest]: difficult to be wrong.
[Guest]: So this is where momentum comes in and says to just discipline, it doesn't matter what,
[Guest]: and that it doesn't matter what the underlying, I'll give you an example of the last, maybe
[Guest]: eight months, and maybe people are right.
[Guest]: So in the stock markets, it's not a zero sum game.
[Guest]: To give you an example, I create a company, and I sell you shares at 100 rupees.
[Guest]: And I have probably invested 50 rupees in the business, but I sell it to you at 100,
[Guest]: I'm happy you've got 100 rupees, I've got 50 rupees of profit.
[Guest]: You take that business, that share, and whoever's running that business earns a little more
[Guest]: profit.
[Guest]: Somebody else says I have value, I see value in it at 200 rupees.
[Guest]: You sell it to that person at 200, you've made a 100 rupee profit.
[Guest]: That person looks at it, the stock price goes to 300.
[Guest]: Who has lost?
[Guest]: It's a zero sum game, means somebody should have lost and somebody should have won.
[Guest]: Nobody lost.
[Guest]: It's the underlying value of the company that became bigger and bigger.
[Guest]: But nobody actually lost the money on this front.
[Guest]: It would have lost money if you had sold at 200, and then the price came back to 100,
[Guest]: and you bought it back at 100, and that person lost the money and so on.
[Guest]: So that's usually not, the stock market as a whole is not a zero sum game.
[Guest]: So your ability to pick up momentum is not at the cost of someone else, or pick up stocks
[Guest]: that are doing well.
[Guest]: It's not at the cost of somebody else.
[Guest]: It's that somebody else does not need to lose in order for you to win.
[Guest]: This is something that I, and I also feel that this philosophy has to, it doesn't come
[Guest]: naturally to us.
[Guest]: We always think of life as a battle.
[Guest]: If you've won, then who's lost?
[Guest]: If India has won, then Australia should have lost the test match.
[Guest]: So how can you have India and Australia both win, and yet have a match?
[Guest]: So the answer to this is not, it's not intuitive to us.
[Guest]: You learn it over time that one person's win could be in one time frame.
[Guest]: Another person's win could be in a different time frame.
[Guest]: They could be overlapping or not even related.
[Guest]: And this is where momentum scores, because you don't have to always win.
[Guest]: You just have, so if a stock goes from 10 to 100, if you make between 25 and 50, that's
[Guest]: enough.
[Guest]: You don't have had to make, made entirely from 10 to 100.
[Guest]: You shouldn't have picked the bottoms or picked the, sold at the tops.
[Guest]: If you made anything in the middle, you made the meat of the whole thing.
[Guest]: This is the tough thing in momentum, because you're fighting your own gut.
[Guest]: And I do this, for me, it's there all the time.
[Guest]: I have the same emotional challenges as anybody else.
[Guest]: It's just that, you know, sometimes, because I've seen it before, I still make those mistakes.
[Guest]: I sometimes sell because the stock is run up too much, it goes to 10,000 rupees.
[Guest]: And then you're like, oh my God, I sold at seven, I had no idea.
[Guest]: And then now I realize that, you know, I will not have an idea.
[Guest]: But I should sell according to a system rather than according to a lopsided view of, oh,
[Guest]: this company has run up too much.
[Guest]: That's the only thing that protects me sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of quick asides before I go on to my next question.
[Amit Varma]: And one is about the whole zero something, it's practically, you know, it's a common
[Amit Varma]: trope, if not a cliche on the show for me to whine about how we are wired to think of
[Amit Varma]: the world in zero some ways, and it doesn't really work in those ways.
[Amit Varma]: So it's refreshing to see you sort of talk about that.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing which I'll take some time to process is the difference between poker
[Amit Varma]: and investing in this case, and poker, of course, is a zero sum game.
[Amit Varma]: And that may be part of the difference.
[Amit Varma]: But what you were earlier saying about how a machine learning figures out a strategy,
[Amit Varma]: but if another machine can know that strategy, it can figure out a better strategy.
[Amit Varma]: Now in poker, typically, there are two ways to play poker, one is exploitative, which
[Amit Varma]: is if I know your strategy, I can exploit your strategy, because you could be bluffing
[Amit Varma]: too much, in which case I will call you more, or you could not be bluffing enough, in which
[Amit Varma]: case I'll know that you have more value bets, and I'll fold to you more, and so on and so
[Amit Varma]: forth.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever you do, I can exploit you.
[Amit Varma]: However, the other way of playing poker is what is called game theory optimal, where
[Amit Varma]: if your sort of ranges are perfect, it doesn't matter what the other person has or what the
[Amit Varma]: other person does, you're guaranteed not to lose.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, let's say there's 200 bucks in a pot, and I bet 100 rupees.
[Amit Varma]: So you have to call 100 to win 300, right?
[Amit Varma]: You're getting three to one odds, you have to be right 20 to 25% of the time.
[Amit Varma]: Now, therefore, if I build my range, so that exactly 25% of the time I have a bluff and
[Amit Varma]: the other 75%, I have a value hand, I cannot lose to you.
[Amit Varma]: You can lose if your frequencies are not correct, and they go on either side, but I cannot lose.
[Amit Varma]: And what would then happen is if you and I are both playing GTO, or game theory optimal,
[Amit Varma]: which is only possible only in theory, because after all, we are all human.
[Amit Varma]: If you're both playing GTO, and if the casino isn't taking a cut, it's basically bang zero
[Amit Varma]: sum, nobody can win or lose.
[Amit Varma]: But because others can't play GTO, the closer you get to it, you can win.
[Amit Varma]: But your description of what, you know, different machine learning algos fighting each other
[Amit Varma]: indicates that in stock markets, there's no GTO, it's all sort of exploitative, or perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: you know, GTO would be too complex to kind of even understand what that could be like.
[Amit Varma]: But my question before I go on to, you know, I said there were three questions arising
[Amit Varma]: out of complexity and humility.
[Amit Varma]: Before we end this, this particular first question about AI, would you agree that at
[Amit Varma]: some point, like it seems inevitable to me, that all trading at some point must be done
[Amit Varma]: by machines, must, because one, they can process information much better and process complexity
[Amit Varma]: much better.
[Amit Varma]: And two, humans are hardwired with so many biases that get in the way, some of which
[Amit Varma]: you described.
[Amit Varma]: So is it then only a question of time that, you know, that that eventually happens?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think, you know, there is actually this theory that eventually, see, the forex
[Guest]: markets are 99% trading by machines, most of it, eventually, a lot of the stock markets
[Guest]: will also be mostly traded by machines, it's just the way that they can trade a lot more.
[Guest]: And they're probably more efficient.
[Guest]: So instead of me saying, I want to sell so many shares, and I believe this is, I have
[Guest]: proposed this as a solution, even in India, to the government selling stakes in their
[Guest]: disinvestment program.
[Guest]: So I'm like, yeah, why disinvest?
[Guest]: Ek kaam karo na, ek program rakho, roj jata hai, 2-3 share, 3-4 share, and whenever it
[Guest]: finds some volume, it sells some more shares, you will eventually get some 10-15,000 crores
[Guest]: or 20, whatever you want to make, you make 100,000 crores, you can get it out of that
[Guest]: system like that, they just hunt for volume, and they will, it will figure out when it's
[Guest]: trying to get game, when somebody's trying to game it.
[Guest]: So it might actually not sell at those times, and then it can figure out when people actually
[Guest]: want to buy those shares, so it can sell a little more at those times.
[Guest]: It is completely better that that is true.
[Guest]: And there's a political reason for this, because if a politician decides to sell a business,
[Guest]: he's going to demand bids, and then he's going to disqualify some people and that will be
[Guest]: politically challenged.
[Guest]: Machine chal raha hai, how can you question?
[Guest]: So you can't, it's a very interesting way to solve a problem that might be both economic
[Guest]: and political.
[Guest]: But that kind of trading will be done by machines forever.
[Guest]: Now eventually, some part of decision making or whether to sell or to buy will also be
[Guest]: done by machines, by saying, listen, there seems to be too much demand, let me put supply
[Guest]: in the place and too much demand, I put too much supply, I put demand, so I sell.
[Guest]: So this part of this equation is definitely going there.
[Guest]: But if you see the last few years, and how things have changed for us, people in the
[Guest]: stock markets, where's the money being made?
[Guest]: It's the guys that invested in these new startups, where there is no price on a daily basis.
[Guest]: So there is a startup that's interesting, it comes up, and it becomes so big, and it
[Guest]: raises money from a bunch of investors, then a bunch of other investors, then a bunch of
[Guest]: third, and then goes to the stock market and sells its shares.
[Guest]: And then it becomes publicly traded, blah, blah, blah.
[Guest]: But it's possible that, you know, I'm sitting on this side of this business, which says,
[Guest]: when it comes to the stock market, then I'll buy it, then it'll become big.
[Guest]: What if it's already become big?
[Guest]: Which is what has happened in the last 20 years, is that all the human intelligence
[Guest]: has gone into places where there's no data, or the data is hidden to you, or the data
[Guest]: is not available to you.
[Guest]: They're creating new businesses by changing the rules of the game, whereas the stock market
[Guest]: guys are working with places where the rules to the game are more well-defined.
[Guest]: So you don't get a paytm in the stock markets.
[Guest]: And in other times, a paytm would have been listed in the stock markets, you would have
[Guest]: been able to buy it.
[Guest]: But because of our listing rules and people doing lots of frauds with listing shady companies
[Guest]: in the past, we've set rules that said, oh, no, you know what, only profitable, more than
[Guest]: three years of profitability, yay, whoa, whoa, yay.
[Guest]: Those guys are like, dude, I don't care, we'll grow big.
[Guest]: And now it's gone to a point where if paytm in India perhaps was listed, it would be probably
[Guest]: part of the nifty-flifty, it's valued at that much.
[Guest]: Even Zomato is probably valued at a time point where it would be called a large cap company,
[Guest]: the top 100 companies in India.
[Guest]: This is a factor, I think, more of, if you think about machines trading, where there's
[Guest]: a lot of data, there's enough data to analyze it, and they make those trades.
[Guest]: The human trading has shifted into the non-exchange traded investment business.
[Guest]: If you automate that, they'll find another way.
[Guest]: So humans, like with the famous Jurassic Park dialogue, which is finally a non-cartoon movie,
[Guest]: life finds a way.
[Guest]: So if you take all the jobs away from the trading humans, they will find something else
[Guest]: to trade.
[Guest]: Today, Bitcoin trading is done by machines.
[Guest]: It wasn't that way.
[Guest]: Earlier machines, humans entered the trade, and now the Bitcoin machines trade against
[Guest]: each other, perhaps.
[Guest]: Tomorrow, there will be another system that will allow humans to trade off of different
[Guest]: levels.
[Guest]: People make money off of different things.
[Guest]: So scarcity is one.
[Guest]: Scarcity is basically, it's one of the ways Indian stock markets work, is that if most
[Guest]: of the shares are held by a very concentrated set of people, then the remaining shares are
[Guest]: too few.
[Guest]: So even a small amount of demand can rocket the price up.
[Guest]: The U.S. operates on a slightly different phenomenon, but Bitcoin is the same.
[Guest]: So Bitcoin is very low float, everybody else wants to hold.
[Guest]: So the prices are basically, if there's enough volume or liquidity at any point, there are
[Guest]: chances the price could drop quite as much, which has also happened.
[Guest]: So that's why it's very volatile.
[Guest]: This phenomenon, I think, has contours that cause...
[Guest]: So machines will trade, and I think humans will also always trade.
[Guest]: They'll find something new, from tulips in the past to private companies today.
[Guest]: There is always something, because humans are geared towards trading.
[Guest]: We love to make deals.
[Guest]: We are like, by nature, deal-making individuals.
[Guest]: So if you tell that the machines are making all the deals, that's just not going to fly.
[Guest]: We'll find something else to deal with.
[Amit Varma]: So you talk about humans being deal-making creatures, and we're always craving action.
[Amit Varma]: We want to push the chips forward, so to say.
[Amit Varma]: Is that a bug rather than a feature?
[Amit Varma]: For example, in poker, it's really just a small 2-3% of the people who really make money
[Amit Varma]: everybody else loses, but that's a zero-sum game.
[Amit Varma]: The point that you were making is that stock markets are a positive-sum game, though when
[Amit Varma]: they're going down, they might seem like a negative-sum game as well.
[Amit Varma]: My second question that arises from complexity and the humility which it should bring us
[Amit Varma]: to is, should the common person invest?
[Amit Varma]: Like earlier, at the start of the show, you gave the advice that everyone should invest,
[Amit Varma]: because that is how you make money.
[Amit Varma]: But that is under the assumption that they are investing in a sensible way and that they
[Amit Varma]: have an edge.
[Amit Varma]: Now, an argument could be made that most people don't have enough knowledge to invest, like
[Amit Varma]: I certainly I don't because of exactly that reason, that most people don't have the knowledge
[Amit Varma]: to invest.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, they are the suckers at the table.
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's an old saying, if you don't know who is a sucker at the table, it's you.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, they are the suckers at the table, they might feel good about themselves
[Amit Varma]: as they ride a bull market, but then it crashes and they realize they know nothing at all.
[Amit Varma]: And that, you know, and that sort of epistemic humility is something that people like you
[Amit Varma]: and I in the different domains, which we actually do know a few things about, the more we learn
[Amit Varma]: about it, the more we realize that there is so much yet to learn, right?
[Amit Varma]: And that constant humility is what makes us better.
[Amit Varma]: The common investor doesn't really have that humility.
[Amit Varma]: And like you also pointed out that the time to exit a share is possibly when the panwala
[Amit Varma]: tells you it's a good time to buy the share.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that, you know, there is a case to be made that maybe common people
[Amit Varma]: should not get excited and go in for some of the action because they could just be in
[Amit Varma]: above their heads.
[Amit Varma]: A lot of the trading is being done by machines, people like you are using incredibly complicated
[Amit Varma]: software.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, one way of investing is you go to a capital mind and, you know, trust Deepak
[Amit Varma]: Shenoy with your money, which is great.
[Amit Varma]: So then you have an expert and he'll do what he has to for you, which is possibly a sensible
[Amit Varma]: way to start.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise be kind of wary because and always, you know, the Dunning-Kruger effect,
[Amit Varma]: the less you know, the more you think, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a great danger with markets where inevitably somebody who is just out there
[Amit Varma]: to exploit the whole greater fool theory is the greater fool.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your kind of take on this?
[Amit Varma]: Because I know that, you know, you care about investing, you would evangelize it.
[Amit Varma]: But there is also this downside that, you know, people can just lose a lot because they
[Guest]: don't know what they're doing.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, let me take this into three parts.
[Guest]: So firstly, the why investment.
[Guest]: So it comes close to a point about why save at all.
[Guest]: And why should you save?
[Guest]: You could keep working.
[Guest]: I mean, our politicians are 80 years old, they're still working.
[Guest]: And why can't we?
[Guest]: We could continuously work to build your capital and whatever comes, spend it and you don't
[Guest]: have to do anything.
[Guest]: The minute you will counter this will probably with, Deepak, what happens if I get an injury?
[Guest]: I don't want to work anymore.
[Guest]: I have to take a holiday.
[Guest]: Where will I get the money for that?
[Guest]: I have to save.
[Guest]: Well, yes, you do.
[Guest]: Then where are you going to save?
[Guest]: So the answer to that is, well, you know what, I'll put it in the bank, and the bank's not
[Guest]: going to cover inflation, your costs are going up, you got to have the money grow to a point
[Guest]: where it's at least the saving is enough to say meet that emergency that you really needed
[Guest]: to meet and so on.
[Guest]: So you're going to have to, you know, kind of beat inflation.
[Guest]: For the longest time, India had these 10%, 11%, 12% rates where I could say, forget it,
[Guest]: put your money in a bank, even if it's a fixed deposit, it's fine, you're getting 12%.
[Guest]: And you'll pay some tax on it and you'll get 8%.
[Guest]: This era has unfortunately gone.
[Guest]: So we're facing a point where a lot of countries have 0% deposit rates, interest rates, a lot
[Guest]: of countries have negative interest rates.
[Guest]: So when you put 100 into a bank, they give you back 99.
[Guest]: The answer to why is very complicated, but it's there, that's the situation, it's happening
[Guest]: in India as well.
[Guest]: As recently as yesterday, I was looking at fixed deposit rates and they've reached 4.5%.
[Guest]: 4.5% may still be okay, compared to the US, but for India, it sounds like a horrible,
[Guest]: horrible number.
[Guest]: But given this, if you want your investments to beat that 4.5%, or you need your money
[Guest]: to grow a little bit more than that, you're going to have to invest.
[Guest]: So sometimes when I say invest, it's only because there is almost no alternative doing
[Guest]: so.
[Guest]: And I don't say invest only in stocks.
[Guest]: Investment is a way to deploy your money so that it becomes more than what it was.
[Guest]: Not necessarily that it should be only in equities and stock markets and some stuff
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: Today, I would say there's a bunch of more things that you can invest in.
[Guest]: You can buy real estate.
[Guest]: Real estate values are believed to go up over time, though in the last 10 years, they have
[Guest]: not perhaps gone anywhere.
[Guest]: There is investment in gold, which is one of those old assets where you almost never
[Guest]: over a 10-year period see a loss, so it tends to grow at the rate that inflation goes up.
[Guest]: Again, something that may not necessarily have occurred in the last 10 years.
[Guest]: The last two years perhaps are an anomaly more than anything else.
[Guest]: But before that, the gold price was more or less stable.
[Guest]: So there are different things you can invest in, and you need to be able to invest primarily
[Guest]: just to make those extra returns that will beat inflation.
[Guest]: If you don't invest, then you've got to work for the rest of your life and assume that
[Guest]: you have a stable income.
[Guest]: The best thing that you could do is build yourself an income that is passive.
[Guest]: When I say that, I mean it could mean writing a book that gets you royalties forever.
[Guest]: But we all know that not all books give you royalties forever, and it's very difficult
[Guest]: to write a book.
[Guest]: Sometimes people just don't know how to write, and sometimes people, I know you're trying
[Guest]: to change that, but I hope you do.
[Guest]: There's a lot more people that come out with great books, but the way people consume content
[Guest]: today is no longer in the format of books alone.
[Guest]: It could be, and today has opened up new avenues.
[Guest]: You could build YouTube videos that eventually get you advertising revenue without even you
[Guest]: having to work for it.
[Guest]: So this passive income thing is a great thing to do around investing.
[Guest]: So it's like saying, listen, I'm getting something else that gives me continuous income, but not
[Guest]: the same thing.
[Guest]: So stocks, or bonds, or fixed deposits, or whatever it is that you invest in, that is
[Guest]: also another way for you to have an income that is beyond the primary job that you're
[Guest]: doing.
[Guest]: That income could be by eating off of the corpus, or by those stocks paying you dividends.
[Guest]: However it is, it doesn't matter.
[Guest]: Because let's say you had five crores today, and that five crores was giving you half a
[Guest]: percent a month.
[Guest]: That's two and a half lakh rupees a month that you could take out of that five crores
[Guest]: every month and spend.
[Guest]: And if you're spending less, maybe only a lakh a month, then one and a half lakhs keeps
[Guest]: getting added to that five crore corpus, and which keeps growing until you draw out enough.
[Guest]: So your ability to now quit whatever you're doing and do something else has no impact
[Guest]: to your life, because you could say, listen, even if I don't get a salary, I could take
[Guest]: out the one lakh a month from this money I'm making from the investments that I have.
[Guest]: And so it gives you that one additional degree of freedom.
[Guest]: And we don't appreciate this enough, but having as many degrees of freedom as you can in your
[Guest]: life is what eventually drives happiness.
[Guest]: Not joys.
[Guest]: Joys you can buy.
[Guest]: You can go to Bali, do snorkeling, you'll get joy.
[Guest]: But happiness is a state of mind.
[Guest]: So it requires you to remove those little latent fears in the back of your head.
[Guest]: And that's one of the reasons why you invest.
[Guest]: Not because you should or you have to.
[Guest]: Because inherent uncertainty, the squirrel that stores nuts.
[Guest]: This is why taxes are bad, because they end up taking away from the guys who save the
[Guest]: nuts for the winter.
[Guest]: But the squirrels saving their winter food is what I call akin to investing.
[Guest]: You don't have to do it.
[Guest]: You could hope to find enough nuts at any point in time to be able to survive.
[Guest]: But it's the recognition of the fact that the nuts may not be there, they may be a winter
[Guest]: and the winter is coming is the reason why.
[Guest]: But I also think that the complexity of investing is too much.
[Guest]: There is way too...
[Guest]: And that's because people in this industry are evil.
[Guest]: That is why they will tell you stupid things like, give me money for six years, then I'll
[Guest]: give you back so much money for five years and oh my God, this is a fantastic return.
[Guest]: And they call it a unit linked insurance package and you're like, oh my God, a ULIP, everybody's
[Guest]: talking about ULIPs now.
[Guest]: But this is just like putting lipstick on a pig.
[Guest]: It's a pig.
[Guest]: It's actually better to have put your money in a fixed deposit in your bank, you would
[Guest]: have got higher returns.
[Guest]: But nobody's telling you that.
[Guest]: They've invented this because A, too much education and B, too little use of education
[Guest]: elsewhere.
[Guest]: So basically, I mean, I say this is a very like uncle kind of dialogue, but the idea
[Guest]: is that if you make things complex, they sound attractive to people who are smart.
[Guest]: And they sound attractive to people who are not smart, also thinking that this person
[Guest]: is smart, he's using words like ULIP in a sentence, which is possibly means that he
[Guest]: knows what he's talking about.
[Guest]: So you automatically get money coming to you, fame, recognition, power, eventually you have
[Guest]: enough money to tell other people that you shouldn't chase after money in your life.
[Guest]: It's a very famous shitty dialogue that people say, you shouldn't look where you go after
[Guest]: passion.
[Guest]: I mean, dude, come on, make your money and then you do whatever passion stuff you want.
[Guest]: But the point about my saying that investing is important and is that you should know that
[Guest]: the need to invest is driven by those saving nuts for winter.
[Guest]: I don't mean nuts in any other way.
[Guest]: And I literally say that that is what will save you from a winter.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean that you have to go and overcomplicate your life by going and
[Guest]: buying a stock that somebody sent you on WhatsApp today, just because that guy sent you five
[Guest]: picks in stock WhatsApp yesterday, because you don't understand this stuff.
[Guest]: Once you do, you might appreciate that that guy's bullshitting himself.
[Guest]: And then you have to have a strategy and a discipline to do things.
[Guest]: And all these complexities of how so discovering, I talked about value investing at one stage,
[Guest]: momentum investing, algorithmic investing, the three different styles.
[Guest]: Not every style appeals to every person.
[Guest]: It takes a four or five year discovery process in order to get enough of an education.
[Guest]: And you're going to pay serious fees to the market for giving you that education before
[Guest]: you figure out who you are.
[Guest]: If you're not that kind of a person, you shouldn't get into complexity.
[Guest]: So simplicity would be easier if they sold it better.
[Guest]: But it is available.
[Guest]: So fixed deposits are simple.
[Guest]: You put so much money, you get so much money, or this is the simplest thing in the world.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, there's no other thing.
[Guest]: But there is complexity in stock markets.
[Guest]: People say, buy this stock versus that complex.
[Guest]: Buy an index makes sense.
[Guest]: I don't care who the top stocks are.
[Guest]: I just have to buy the index and or maybe I pay an index fund manager.
[Guest]: He charges me very little fees, but he always buys the top stocks and I'm happy to go with
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: I'm not going to put 100 rupees into equities.
[Guest]: I'm going to put only 70, 30 rupees will be in fixed deposits or in bonds.
[Guest]: And that's it.
[Guest]: That's the end of my life.
[Guest]: No, Harry Markowitz created this phenomenal, and this goes back to your other thing about
[Guest]: how your childhood or your prime years shape your fears and your, you know, your loyalties.
[Guest]: Harry Markowitz created this massive capital allocation pro thing.
[Guest]: He won some Nobel type of prize.
[Guest]: Maybe it's a Nobel itself.
[Guest]: I'm sorry.
[Guest]: I don't want to, I don't mean to insult him, but he's a very famous guy.
[Guest]: So when he was asked, how do you invest your money?
[Guest]: Now people are expecting an answer like, God, I do calculate risk free capital versus risk
[Guest]: cost of capital.
[Guest]: And I do an adjustment and do an inverse derivative of this.
[Guest]: He said, I thought about all of the alternatives and I put 50% of my money in stocks and 50%
[Guest]: of my money in bonds.
[Guest]: Although he invented the way to figure out how to allocate more money to stocks at a
[Guest]: certain time.
[Guest]: He said, it's too complex.
[Guest]: I just like 50-50 and I'm done.
[Guest]: The guy who invented the algorithm that tells you how to differentiate between the two doesn't
[Guest]: do it himself.
[Guest]: And there's another example of somebody else who talked about, he said about how the past
[Guest]: shaped his life.
[Guest]: He said, I grew up in Nazi Germany and I saw the worst of all the excesses that people
[Guest]: lent in the nastiest side of life.
[Guest]: And what, you know, the stock market bust, which is what Nazi Germany actually came out
[Guest]: of the 1929, 1932 depression was caused by a stock market crash.
[Guest]: And he says, when I see that and I see the evil that, you know, things happen, I am too
[Guest]: scared of the future to put my money into anything but bonds.
[Guest]: So most people who were born in those times have different risk appetites than people
[Guest]: who were born in the forties in the US, which was the baby boomer era.
[Guest]: And therefore those people are much more likely to put money into stocks.
[Guest]: People who were born in the sixties saw the 1970s oil shocks and depressions, again, they
[Guest]: were likely to put more money.
[Guest]: So that's about also discovering who you are and how your past shapes your life.
[Guest]: It's important to do that because you don't want to be unhappy choosing a strategy that
[Guest]: is lousy.
[Guest]: So just find, according to me, invest according to the kind of risk you can, you're willing
[Guest]: to take.
[Guest]: If you're not willing to take risk, don't believe anyone who tells you that you should
[Guest]: take risk.
[Guest]: The only caveat to this is if you're completely screwed, and this is my sheer advice to everybody,
[Guest]: I've written this in a thing, the biggest advice somebody can give to you is make more
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: That's the end of that story.
[Guest]: Because if the advice does not involve make more money, you're too rich to care.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And so it sounds much like be happy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you can just generally kind of throw it out there.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of quick asides.
[Amit Varma]: One is I'm glad that you railed against taxes, or you brought up saving nuts for winter there.
[Amit Varma]: And my point about taxes simply is that we should think of taxes as part time slavery.
[Amit Varma]: If I am giving 25% of my income to the government, I am basically working for the government
[Amit Varma]: between January and March.
[Amit Varma]: I start only in April between January and March, I am a slave of the government.
[Amit Varma]: And which is not to say that there should be no taxes, there should you know, we need
[Amit Varma]: taxes, we need the state.
[Amit Varma]: But we should question what is done with our taxes far more than we actually do, which
[Amit Varma]: is the unfortunate thing we keep demanding government should spend on this government
[Amit Varma]: should rescue where India government should do this.
[Amit Varma]: But it's our slavery, which is the consequence of that.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing is, you said, you know, you spoke about going to Bali and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: listen, I've just come out of a year of lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I went to frickin Santa Cruz from Andheri the other day, and I felt so happy.
[Amit Varma]: So don't kind of get me started on that.
[Amit Varma]: The third thing I would say is that, you know, to sort of paraphrase what you said about
[Amit Varma]: why invest, the point is that listen, you, even if you don't want to invest in the stock
[Amit Varma]: market, you are making a decision of what to do with the money that you're saving, you
[Amit Varma]: know, either it is in a savings account or a fixed deposit or a stock market or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: Now, all of these carry different kinds of risk reward ratios, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And because it is your hard earned money, it is at least your responsibility to figure
[Amit Varma]: out how much risk you're willing to take and get the information about which of these is
[Amit Varma]: therefore right for you.
[Amit Varma]: As you so wisely said, you know, I just follow inertia, and I just keep it lying in my savings
[Amit Varma]: account, because, you know, just don't have the bandwidth to figure out all of the other
[Amit Varma]: stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of brings me to the other like, I don't buy and you know, relationship managers
[Amit Varma]: from the bank will call me and say, Hey, why don't you buy this instrument or that instrument?
[Amit Varma]: And I simply don't because as you pointed out that so much of investment advice that
[Amit Varma]: the common person gets is so incredibly scammy, like selling insurance to 65 year olds, and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, a common example that you've given in the past, and so much of it is so scammy.
[Amit Varma]: And it makes me wonder that, you know, when I can sit at home and start a YouTube channel
[Amit Varma]: or a podcast or whatever, with such simple tools at my disposal, you know, why don't
[Amit Varma]: we have a stage where I could, you know, I could invest my money, you know, using such
[Amit Varma]: simple tools.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, one way of doing that is by going to Mr. Chinoy for advice or just finding
[Amit Varma]: an intermediary who does that for you, but then which intermediary do you trust?
[Amit Varma]: Why do you trust them?
[Amit Varma]: And so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember my third question really coming out of complexity and that whole complexity
[Amit Varma]: humility paradigm was really about how, if so much of stock prices are determined by
[Amit Varma]: narratives, like one thing that you want about which is a sort of a red flag against the
[Amit Varma]: companies when a company says we are going to do this, you know, we are going to raise
[Amit Varma]: capital or we are going to sell this or sell that and whatever, and your point simply was
[Amit Varma]: that why are you telling me you're going to do that?
[Amit Varma]: Why don't you just freaking do it?
[Amit Varma]: And the fact that it is telling you about what it is going to do instead of doing it
[Amit Varma]: is a red flag, because it means it is trying to build that narrative and is focused on
[Amit Varma]: the share price.
[Amit Varma]: Now, our mutual friend, Nitin Pai, who is also your Bengaluru city mate, you know, once
[Amit Varma]: remarked when those whole allegations came up against a particular party for hacking
[Amit Varma]: EVMs.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, why do they need to hack EVMs?
[Amit Varma]: It is easier to hack the human mind.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that that is true.
[Amit Varma]: And what you do have with all these peddlers of narratives is that you have incredibly
[Amit Varma]: skilled marketers who know how to manipulate the human mind, perhaps using the kind of
[Amit Varma]: jargon you mentioned, ki hum, you know, ULIP or debenture kar denge and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And you think, huh, this guy knows what he's talking about.
[Amit Varma]: But techniques of hacking the human mind have become so complicated that as a common person
[Amit Varma]: who doesn't know anything about this subject, my instinct is that just stay the hell away.
[Amit Varma]: Because otherwise, I am going to get fooled.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I know a lot about one or two subjects, but everything else, I am extremely wary of
[Amit Varma]: being conned.
[Amit Varma]: And here, of course, there is a lot at stake, so you can get conned.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, is this something that you see changing the fact that the common man has
[Amit Varma]: to be permanently bewildered?
[Amit Varma]: Whereas with other things, like I no longer, you know, if I buy a printer, it's plug and
[Amit Varma]: play.
[Amit Varma]: I don't have to install 40 freaking drivers like we had to do 20 years ago.
[Amit Varma]: That got simplified.
[Amit Varma]: You were telling me before the session started about how you assembled a desktop computer
[Amit Varma]: for your son.
[Amit Varma]: And it was so easy.
[Amit Varma]: Motherboard liya, chipset liya, hard drive liya, sab connect kiya and it's just working
[Amit Varma]: out of the box.
[Amit Varma]: To me, that's unimaginable because that's not how I know computers.
[Amit Varma]: So can this kind of thing, what you do with your money and what happens to it, can this
[Amit Varma]: ever get simplified?
[Amit Varma]: Isn't that the next big problem waiting to be solved?
[Guest]: This is very interesting.
[Guest]: I think, I mean, okay, I'm betting my future on the fact that it is a problem worth solving.
[Guest]: So I am very biased on that.
[Guest]: So I believe it is my job to make my job obsolete, because I come from a background where automation
[Guest]: is the only God you care about, which means you're from technology, you're going to automate
[Guest]: things, you're going to remove the intermediaries.
[Guest]: And yet here I am as an intermediary.
[Guest]: Somebody I asked to trust me in order to figure out what's best for their money.
[Guest]: Sometimes this philosophy can be, the more people have tried this in the past saying,
[Guest]: listen, we'll give you an algorithm and you can invest according to that algorithm.
[Guest]: You don't even need me, you just have to kind of, but every algorithm has its faults and
[Guest]: every human therefore has a complication because they're now thinking not just because, is
[Guest]: this a problem with the algorithm?
[Guest]: Is this natural that once in a while I'll see a loss or do I have to change this algorithm?
[Guest]: And now I need a human being to help me figure out whether this is the case or that is the
[Guest]: case.
[Guest]: And then if I need a human being anyway, and I'm going to go with his advice, then why
[Guest]: do I need the algorithm?
[Guest]: Let him go and select whatever it is that he wants.
[Guest]: So we fall back on human trust today.
[Guest]: I believe in the, like in the U.S. they have tried things like, oh, we do automatic accounts.
[Guest]: So when you save your money into a bank account, it automatically gets swept into some kind
[Guest]: of a money market account.
[Guest]: And then from there it goes into some kind of stock market account and gets invested.
[Guest]: Today, for instance, you and I don't have employee provident fund, but if we did, that
[Guest]: money, 10% of it would be forcibly invested into the stock market.
[Guest]: Even if we didn't like stocks, there's nothing we can do about it.
[Guest]: Somebody is automatically doing that for us.
[Guest]: India has come, interestingly, from a phase of forced investing by telling us that you
[Guest]: don't know what is best for you and therefore a fixed deposit is that.
[Guest]: You don't know what is best for you, so you give me money at 4.5%, 5%, 6% as a fixed deposit.
[Guest]: I will go lend it to Reliance Industries at 9.5%.
[Guest]: I will make the intermediate thing.
[Guest]: And don't ask me why you can't lend to Reliance at 9.5% because you don't know what is good
[Guest]: for you.
[Guest]: When we evolved from there, we said, OK, maybe you know that giving money to Reliance is
[Guest]: better for you.
[Guest]: Go ahead and do it.
[Guest]: So when we've evolved, we've just added one degree of freedom, removed the institution
[Guest]: called the bank, which was the intermediary between us and Reliance, and allows us to
[Guest]: directly talk to Reliance.
[Guest]: Now, you might argue this is a good thing because it removes the power of the banker
[Guest]: to manipulate our fortunes, because they have, and also allows us to get a slightly higher
[Guest]: return by doing things ourselves.
[Guest]: In this process now, there's complexity.
[Guest]: The guy who doesn't know both the bank or Reliance doesn't know whether he should go
[Guest]: to Reliance or he should go to bank.
[Guest]: So now you have this dichotomy, which has been created by more information.
[Guest]: It's like saying, why do we need 48 brands of soap?
[Guest]: We know that all the soap does is clean you, and maybe you can put some scent in one and
[Guest]: some scent in the other.
[Guest]: But if you go to the market today, there are big, small, tiny.
[Guest]: This melts fast, does not.
[Guest]: So for women only, I'm like, hello, for women only?
[Guest]: I mean, come on.
[Guest]: But no, but that's the reality.
[Guest]: And then you have shampoos for this kind of hair.
[Guest]: So the more developed a country is, the more degrees of freedom a country has, the more
[Guest]: choices of soap there are in its supermarkets.
[Guest]: And therefore, the more choices of investments there will be for the citizens of that country.
[Guest]: And therefore, at some level, that complexity is byproduct of our freedoms.
[Guest]: So if we took it away in some way, and we continue to retain freedom as an important
[Guest]: part of our society, then we would continue to have other investment products on top of
[Guest]: whatever is simple.
[Guest]: So what is simple is always not going to be easy to accept.
[Guest]: But I do think that given the amount of misselling and the lack of retribution, because if somebody
[Guest]: missold your policy, insurance policy, there is no retribution.
[Guest]: The guy gets to continue to sleep at night while you don't.
[Guest]: So this happens because people say that buyer has to beware.
[Guest]: I don't think that's a correct philosophy, that we need laws.
[Guest]: And here, I will be a little anti-libertarian in the sense I will say that you do need laws
[Guest]: to protect against misselling of this kind.
[Guest]: But at the same time, I don't want choice to be taken away.
[Guest]: That means you're going to need that choice of saying, I go with the simple thing.
[Guest]: That's just easy for everybody to see what I'm doing.
[Guest]: And there's a low-risk thing and a high-risk thing, and it's very simple.
[Guest]: Low-risk thing will be just bank deposit kind of thing.
[Guest]: High-risk thing will be something more risky, like stocks or real estate or whatever it
[Guest]: is.
[Guest]: And you can choose some money here and some money there, and you're done.
[Guest]: That would be a brilliant thing to have.
[Guest]: I don't know whether, and I'm going to bet my future on the fact that people desire simplicity.
[Guest]: Although everything in the past shows that they love complexity.
[Guest]: But the example you said came to mind, which is, why do we just buy devices now and they
[Guest]: just work?
[Guest]: You don't hear people complaining a lot about, oh my God, I gave my cell phone to my service
[Guest]: station for five days, it hasn't come back.
[Guest]: Of course, you'll find once in a while those kind of complaints.
[Guest]: But nobody gives their cell phones for service anymore.
[Guest]: You either throw it away and buy a new one, or you know that once it goes wrong, it's
[Guest]: gone.
[Guest]: You just replace it.
[Guest]: But you don't get your TV repaired.
[Guest]: When I was a kid, my TV would always be going bad, and we'd call a repairer to come and
[Guest]: he would do something complicated and repair it and go away.
[Guest]: Now, these people are very smart, so they know exactly what is wrong with your cathode
[Guest]: ray tube TV and whether something is bad or something like that.
[Guest]: But their entire jobs have been taken away because you don't need to repair this thing
[Guest]: anymore.
[Guest]: When electric cars come, the nature of the system is that today a dealership exists a
[Guest]: little bit because of sales, but this much because of service, much more.
[Guest]: The service and spares give the dealership its much required revenue in order for it
[Guest]: to continue to have a dealership.
[Guest]: Tomorrow, if an electric car comes, they don't need any service.
[Guest]: Tesla has a lifetime warranty.
[Guest]: They can afford to do it.
[Guest]: There are much lower parts.
[Guest]: You don't have to do anything.
[Guest]: There's no concept called an oil change of any sort.
[Guest]: I mean, maybe there's some inside the motors, but I don't know.
[Guest]: But however, what I'm trying to get at is that when you've simplified something through
[Guest]: technology or through some kind of new this thing, it changes that industry forever.
[Guest]: Tomorrow's dealers, they may not be no dealers, you may be directly buying from Tesla, which
[Guest]: you currently have to because Tesla has no dealers.
[Guest]: But every other manufacturer, Maruti, you don't buy from Maruti, you go to a dealer.
[Guest]: You can't go to Hindustan Unilever's website and buy even one soap, although they sell
[Guest]: soap.
[Guest]: You can't go to P&G and buy diapers.
[Guest]: They sell diapers, but the reason is because they've built a supply chain.
[Guest]: You go to the distributors in the middle and those distributors earn a little bit of margin
[Guest]: so that so and if P&G starts selling diapers directly and everybody were buying from them,
[Guest]: all those people would go out of business and that would change the nature of life.
[Guest]: So when you do that in finance, you also impact a very large number of people by removing
[Guest]: the intermediaries in the place.
[Guest]: But that's the only way to go.
[Guest]: In the US, there's a company called Vanguard, which started in the 70s.
[Guest]: It said, listen, don't invest with active fund managers.
[Guest]: Active fund managers are perhaps maybe people like me who say, Deepak, I mean, so I'll tell
[Guest]: you, listen, Amit, I know how to invest.
[Guest]: I can find stocks.
[Guest]: I have this fantastic strategy and I will find these stocks and I will make you lots
[Guest]: of money.
[Guest]: And you give me money.
[Guest]: I'm actively managing your funds.
[Guest]: For that, I charge you a 1%, 2% a year, or typically in India, it's like 2%.
[Guest]: But they charge you 2% a year to manage your money.
[Guest]: What Vanguard did was this guy called John Bogle, he said, listen, this is crazy because
[Guest]: if I just bought the indexes, I would beat most of these active fund managers.
[Guest]: Sure, one or two will beat me, but they're not going to be the same one or two for a
[Guest]: long time.
[Guest]: A few will beat me this year and tomorrow it'll be ICICI and day after tomorrow it'll
[Guest]: be Axis and fourth year it'll be somebody else.
[Guest]: So if you're stuck with one fund, chances are you'll be on top for one year, but then
[Guest]: you'll be on the bottom for the rest of the years.
[Guest]: So if you were to look at something simple enough and that beats just because of charging
[Guest]: lower fees, Vanguard changed the ecosystem.
[Guest]: It's the second largest fund manager in the world today.
[Guest]: It manages, I don't know, some $7 trillion, $6 trillion worth of assets.
[Guest]: The biggest one is a company called BlackRock, run by Larry Fink, which has both active and
[Guest]: is passive.
[Guest]: But the passive so much overshadows the active that you are running on a world that is almost
[Guest]: entirely run on index funds.
[Guest]: When I say index funds, it means people are not actively making decisions, they're just
[Guest]: the largest market cap companies.
[Guest]: And what happens when you have a system where the largest companies are the ones that everybody
[Guest]: invests in, is that the largest companies get more money.
[Guest]: So at some point, perhaps, it will not matter if these companies make profits or not.
[Guest]: Because when you save money and it goes automatically into these passive funds, nobody's making
[Guest]: any stock selections.
[Guest]: People are just buying the highest-earned companies.
[Guest]: So the money keeps going to the highest-quality companies.
[Guest]: Eventually, there'll be a small set of people, perhaps influential, that will then say, listen,
[Guest]: I know that this company is a fraud.
[Guest]: You're giving it more money, but it's there in the top simply because you're giving it
[Guest]: more money.
[Guest]: But I think it'll go down.
[Guest]: They go and short those stocks.
[Guest]: Some of those stocks fall.
[Guest]: Then you, because they fall, you stop giving them any more money.
[Guest]: And then they fall all the way to zero.
[Guest]: Something else comes up.
[Guest]: This is the way the systems in the US and all work right now.
[Guest]: And because they have simplified this process, it's very easy for you to make that investment.
[Guest]: Hopefully in India, and I believe this will come because it's there, that you will be
[Guest]: having one of those choices.
[Guest]: And one of those choices will be, don't put too much of your mind to it.
[Guest]: Go with a strategy, a passive concept that has worked in the past and that will continue
[Guest]: to work.
[Guest]: You may not be the best that's out there, but you will definitely not be the worst.
[Guest]: Because you're not making these active calls.
[Guest]: This philosophy, I think eventually it's probably less than 5% in India, but I think it will
[Guest]: go up to 35-40% eventually.
[Amit Varma]: Well, lots to unpack there again.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd say that, you know, the sort of the car dealerships being driven out of car dealership
[Amit Varma]: by electric cars, because, you know, they mostly do service and that won't be required.
[Amit Varma]: Reminds me of the STD boots you spoke about earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And I think we'd both agree that that kind of creative destruction is a damn good thing.
[Amit Varma]: It brings value for people.
[Amit Varma]: It goes back into the economy, creates new jobs and new sectors.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's not like all the people who were running STD boots could do nothing else
[Amit Varma]: with their lives.
[Amit Varma]: The economy boomed and they found other things to do.
[Amit Varma]: And I would sort of contest a couple of things.
[Amit Varma]: One is, I would say that, you know, having laws that protect pensioners from evil insurance
[Amit Varma]: salesmen are not anti-libertarian.
[Amit Varma]: Every libertarian would agree that you need that kind of protection, whether it's through
[Amit Varma]: tort laws or someone, but if someone, you know, misrepresents a particular product or
[Amit Varma]: service and they make money off you, that's basically cheating.
[Amit Varma]: So of course, you want the rule of law to protect you from that.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing I'd say is that, you know, I used to bring about the supermarket analogy.
[Amit Varma]: I used to talk about 80 kinds of shampoos at the supermarket and say how that's such
[Amit Varma]: a great thing.
[Amit Varma]: And I've written a column about this in the context of education, about how our students
[Amit Varma]: today don't have choice.
[Amit Varma]: They have one kind of system, one kind of school, but shampoo people have a lot of choice.
[Amit Varma]: And I would say that, you know, what you said was that complexity is a byproduct of a free
[Amit Varma]: society.
[Amit Varma]: I'd say choice is a byproduct of a free society and not necessarily complexity.
[Amit Varma]: Because when I go to buy a soap, I think I can be assured that every soap I pick up in
[Amit Varma]: the supermarket will do the job of cleaning me.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: Whereas I don't have the same assurance with any kind of financial product I see because
[Amit Varma]: I just need too much know-how to even begin to understand how the hell they work.
[Amit Varma]: But as you're pointing out, maybe, you know, we can, I think, simultaneously move towards
[Amit Varma]: a greater choice and greater simplicity.
[Amit Varma]: And all these frauds who fall by the wayside, as will inevitably happen, like the STD Boots
[Amit Varma]: of yore.
[Amit Varma]: Though the STD Boots guys weren't frauds, they were important businessmen providing
[Amit Varma]: a useful service that is no longer required.
[Amit Varma]: But you know that things will kind of change.
[Guest]: Let me ask you point one thing over there, very interesting, because there's this interesting
[Guest]: analogy of, I mean, the story that goes mixing the rounds.
[Guest]: I rail about how an insurance policy that you could have taken would have made more
[Guest]: money in a fixed deposit.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And sometimes even I'm stupid, because the problem isn't that they're buying a substandard
[Guest]: product that can help them make lesser money in the future.
[Guest]: Sometimes all that is required that people need is to save money, regardless of whether
[Guest]: it earns 5% or 3%, because there's a story that goes around doing the rounds saying this
[Guest]: is guy who's a smoker and somebody comes to him and asks him, how many cigarettes do you
[Guest]: smoke a day?
[Guest]: He says, 20.
[Guest]: And then there's 20 cigarettes a day.
[Guest]: How many years have you been smoking?
[Guest]: 30 years.
[Guest]: So 30 years into 365 into 20, my God, that's some 85 lakh rupees, you could have bought
[Guest]: a Ferrari by now.
[Guest]: So this guy looks at the person and says, well, do you smoke?
[Guest]: No, come on.
[Guest]: Where's your Ferrari?
[Guest]: That's the point, right, in the end, I can rail about these products all I want.
[Guest]: But even if it's doing that little iota of service of saying that you could in the end
[Guest]: have a bunch of money that came out of nowhere, I tell you this, I felt this myself.
[Guest]: I had an insurance policy I had bought in 2000 or something like that, which was a horrible
[Guest]: insurance product.
[Guest]: But given the way I am, I always look at this sunk cost fallacy and every point in time,
[Guest]: I'm going to shift or I'm going to look at this as a, should I get out?
[Guest]: Should I stay in?
[Guest]: What's better?
[Guest]: We forget what's happened in the past.
[Guest]: It was always better to stay in.
[Guest]: I got this money this year, I went and bought my son a piano.
[Guest]: This gives me immense amount of joy.
[Guest]: I tell you, just getting that money, it was a decent sum of money, but just getting that
[Guest]: money made me feel that, dude, you know what, I know it is a shitty product.
[Guest]: But just in the middle of a lockdown, getting this nice little check or this money coming
[Guest]: into your bank account, that is awesome.
[Guest]: And I want to say this, all my bullshit about you learning to be a better investor is just
[Guest]: throw it out if you're not doing anything to save.
[Guest]: If you're saving money and it's sitting in your bank account and you're not spending
[Guest]: too much of it, even sometimes that is enough, you don't have to invest.
[Guest]: Actually, this simplification of investing is glorifying investing more than perhaps
[Guest]: what is really required.
[Guest]: It's just save and you'll make out all right.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it can be as simple as that.
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, in previous interviews, you've done this really nice episode, I think episode
[Amit Varma]: four of the Capital Mind podcast, which I'll link from the show notes, where you spoke
[Amit Varma]: about these kinds of intermediaries and people who will, you know, sell an insurance product
[Amit Varma]: to a 65 year old pensioner and not let him know that there's no liquidity.
[Amit Varma]: So he has no escape.
[Amit Varma]: His money is just blocked for five years and stuff like that just sounds like horrendous
[Amit Varma]: to me, which is why my advice would be that if you do not understand something completely,
[Amit Varma]: do not do it, you know, beware of the Dunning-Kruger effect, have some humility about the limits
[Amit Varma]: of your own knowledge, which is why my money is in a savings account.
[Amit Varma]: I am saving whatever little there is of it.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, let's let's kind of move on to, you know, people would have wondered,
[Amit Varma]: Amit hasn't asked Deepak the one thing we want him to ask, right, which is the economy
[Amit Varma]: is going down, down, down, stock market is going up, up, up.
[Amit Varma]: Now, why is this?
[Amit Varma]: You have of course written, you wrote a column about this in June, which I love where you
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how in 1958, US industrial production fell 10% in less than a year, stock market
[Amit Varma]: went up 30%.
[Amit Varma]: You've quoted John Templeton's explanation of that and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But in simple terms, for all the janta who sat through patiently for three hours to wait
[Amit Varma]: for me to ask you this question, ki bhai ho kya raha hai?
[Amit Varma]: Is this all a big scam?
[Guest]: Kindly explain.
[Guest]: Well, everything's a big scam, if you ask me, but then it doesn't, you know, at that
[Guest]: level, it doesn't matter on a long enough timeline, the chances of survival of anything
[Guest]: goes to zero, right?
[Guest]: So the problem at some point is that we are trying to justify this market.
[Guest]: It's not justifiable.
[Guest]: This is a very, very interesting situation where you've had, I will not try to justify
[Guest]: stock market.
[Guest]: Now, don't get me wrong here.
[Guest]: I will not say that this is a great market, but something has changed.
[Guest]: And what that something is, is this glut of liquidity.
[Guest]: To give you an example of how crazy it has been, the amount of money that's been printed
[Guest]: in the last one year, perhaps, you know, is greater than money printed in the last 10.
[Guest]: And the money printed in the last 10 was greater than the last 30.
[Guest]: The idea that the central bankers have decided is that I will not let stock prices fall specifically
[Guest]: stock price.
[Guest]: I don't know why.
[Guest]: And one of the reasons in the US is very clear is that people's when they've made interest
[Guest]: rate zero, they have literally told us that there will be no interest that you will receive
[Guest]: on the money that you place inside a bank.
[Guest]: And therefore, you have to take risk in your investments.
[Guest]: And they have taken that risk by putting their money into stocks.
[Guest]: Since people's retirement money is now almost entirely into stocks, you can't ruin the stock
[Guest]: market.
[Guest]: It has political ramifications because you're killing people's retirements.
[Guest]: And when you do that, you say that I will protect the stock market at any cost.
[Guest]: The answer to doing that is to print money.
[Guest]: When you print money, a lot of it, what has happened really is that companies like Google,
[Guest]: Facebook, which otherwise in an interest bearing economy would have taken years and years and
[Guest]: years to get profitable, suddenly become not well not to get profitable to get attractive.
[Guest]: And they would have died.
[Guest]: Because if you had invested, let's say, in a Facebook in the early years, you might have
[Guest]: said, look, I mean, why am I investing in a Facebook, it's not making any money.
[Guest]: And you know, it's interesting technology.
[Guest]: But what's the point of it?
[Guest]: The other side of that equation is, dude, where else will you put your money?
[Guest]: Nowhere else is that interested.
[Guest]: Okay, okay, let's keep it here.
[Guest]: So Facebook gets that amount of time like Uber has, like Swiggy has, they may be making
[Guest]: losses.
[Guest]: But people are forgiving those losses, specifically foreign investors, who are saying, listen,
[Guest]: go ahead, build a big industry, kill all the delivery boys, you become the delivery boy
[Guest]: network of India.
[Guest]: And though, you know, nobody else can compete with you, because everybody else has an interest
[Guest]: rate to fight against.
[Guest]: So when you do that, you create a different set of incentives.
[Guest]: Same way in stock markets, people have been incentivized to invest, when they've invested,
[Guest]: the stock market's gone up, and around the world, it's not just in India.
[Guest]: So around the world, also, they have discovered, oh, India is an interesting phenomenon, let's
[Guest]: invest there.
[Guest]: They invest into a fund that invests in India, that money comes to India.
[Guest]: In the last two months, that's November and December of 2020, 1,20,000 crores has come
[Guest]: into the Indian stock markets from abroad, forget from India, 1,20,000 crores has come.
[Guest]: And that massive 30% fall you saw in April, in March of 2020, during the COVID crisis,
[Guest]: saw only 60,000 crores exit.
[Guest]: So literally, twice that has come.
[Guest]: And that is not even, okay, to give you an example of what 120,000 crores is, today,
[Guest]: it's about maybe $16 billion, $16 billion is in a whole two month cycle, is nothing.
[Guest]: And I say nothing because what the U.S. has printed in March or April together is $5 trillion
[Guest]: or something like that.
[Guest]: Their first stimulus was $2 trillion, that is nearly 100 times more than what India received
[Guest]: as foreign investment in the stock markets in the last two months.
[Guest]: So the scale of things is that India is so tiny that even if you throw it what are crumbs
[Guest]: from outside, now India gets about 1% of worldwide capital, okay?
[Guest]: So if new capital that has been printed, money that has been printed is $5 trillion, India
[Guest]: should get a $50 billion check at some point, I mean, together, added up, out of which only
[Guest]: 16 has come.
[Guest]: So you can imagine that if they've printed $5 trillion already, and they're promising
[Guest]: to print more because there's a stimulus coming in the U.S., in Europe, in Britain, in Japan,
[Guest]: there's always a stimulus that's like permanently stimulated.
[Guest]: And then you've got all that money, 1% of that makes its way to India, just that 1%.
[Guest]: Forget India being a big economy or whatever, just 1%.
[Guest]: That would be 2 or 3x what India would receive in any great year.
[Guest]: And that's going to keep these stock markets irrationally buoyant for a long time.
[Guest]: So looking at it from a primarily, oh my God, we're trading at 40 times earnings and 50
[Guest]: times earnings is one way to think about it.
[Guest]: But the other way to think about it is to say, these guys keep printing this money.
[Guest]: And whenever there's a crisis, they print more money.
[Guest]: So at what point are you going to fight them?
[Guest]: Maybe they'll keep printing it until I die, at which point my fight will be useless, right?
[Guest]: So at some point, if your savings bank account gave you 0% returns, you would also be like,
[Guest]: dude, put a little bit in stocks, and you'll watch it go up and you'll be happy about it.
[Guest]: And when it goes down, of course, everybody curses the world.
[Guest]: But nowadays, those down cycles last two months before central banks come together and say,
[Guest]: dude, let's print our ass off and get.
[Guest]: So I think that is a true explanation of where we are today.
[Guest]: But I would hesitate to say that this is in any form permanent.
[Guest]: Life changes very fast, very often, and more when you least expect it.
[Guest]: So today, if you want to invest, I would say, just be careful.
[Guest]: The music's playing, but you've got to be standing near the door.
[Guest]: At some point in time, you know, I mean, it's easier, okay, let's put it this way.
[Guest]: You would walk more carefully if you knew you were walking on eggs.
[Guest]: So if you don't know that you're walking on eggs, you're in for surprise at some point,
[Guest]: because they're hard boiled today, and the tomorrow's ones are not.
[Guest]: So the questions that sometimes, and you know, Warren Buffett has this fantastic scene.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm a big fan of his persona.
[Guest]: Not so much of his investing philosophy, but from his persona itself.
[Guest]: And the persona is great, because he makes these pithy one liners, which kind of embody
[Guest]: so many things in that one sentence that you say, dude, I couldn't have done it myself.
[Guest]: So he says, oh, it's only when the tide runs out that you find out who's swimming naked,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So it's true in the stock market.
[Guest]: You know, everybody's making money today, a jet airways, which hasn't flown off three
[Guest]: years, two years, is still making new highs in the stock market today.
[Guest]: And people are buying smoke, not necessarily mirrors.
[Guest]: And I say, you know, today, even a pulse is optional, jet airways does not have a pulse.
[Guest]: And it's making new highs.
[Guest]: And in that kind of a market, you got to be careful.
[Guest]: So things can break down at any point.
[Guest]: And when it's going to be, but what I know is this is forever going to be interesting
[Guest]: and perplexing at the same time.
[Guest]: So you, you know, somebody told me this, naak bandh karke invest karo.
[Guest]: This is one of those times when the only person who can do it is going to successfully close
[Guest]: his nose and be aware that he's going to take his money out with a loss when he has to.
[Guest]: But that the more irrational this market gets, it can get even more.
[Guest]: Alan Greenspan had this saying that he said this, if stock prices are increasingly irrational,
[Guest]: and I put out a tweet thread about this, which is that when he said it, the price was X,
[Guest]: it went on to some 30% more, and then dropped 20%.
[Guest]: The lowest point of the after that drop was still 10% higher than when he said it, then
[Guest]: it went on to make another 50% higher, you imagine the frustration of this guy who's,
[Guest]: I mean, who's looking at Greenspan and said, he's saying it irrational, it must be irrational.
[Guest]: And for six years did not see prices come down to anywhere close to his level.
[Guest]: So that's what I say that this is irrational as a market, it's happening because of the
[Guest]: glut of liquidity, you're fighting the central bankers by saying I won't invest when the
[Guest]: market valuations are so high, and therefore, your strategy should be a completely different
[Guest]: one.
[Guest]: Be careful.
[Guest]: That's what I would say.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, there's also that other pithy one liner about how the market can stay irrational
[Amit Varma]: longer than you can stay solvent.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're planning to kind of fight the irrationality, let me kind of process this
[Amit Varma]: consequence of printing money.
[Amit Varma]: Now, typically, what we are taught in microeconomics and is broadly true is that if you increase
[Amit Varma]: the money supply, inflation happens.
[Amit Varma]: Because if you're just going to print money, money supply goes up relative to the goods
[Amit Varma]: and services that are available.
[Amit Varma]: So inflation happen and inflation is, of course, a tax on the poor, because the poor are having
[Amit Varma]: to pay more.
[Amit Varma]: Now, as you've pointed out in the real world, over the last 10 years, printing money hasn't
[Amit Varma]: really led to that kind of real world inflation, possibly because of factors like growing productivity
[Amit Varma]: and technology making things cheaper at the same time, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So you could say that, given that in the counterfactual, things would possibly have been even cheaper,
[Amit Varma]: that this is an unseen kind of inflation, that, you know, doesn't result in prices necessarily
[Amit Varma]: moving up, but in being higher than they otherwise would be.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of this is entering, sort of keeping the stock market going, that is possibly sort
[Amit Varma]: of the scene inflation, as it were, you know, what are, you know, and it just, again, strikes
[Amit Varma]: me and, you know, I don't know the subject in much depth, so I'm asking you, but it seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that at some point, something's got to give, or is it the case that governments
[Amit Varma]: can just keep printing money every time there's a crisis, they'll get together, lower the
[Amit Varma]: interest rate, print more money and keep the dance going on, as it were, or do you think
[Amit Varma]: something's got to give?
[Guest]: What is your sense of what's happening?
[Guest]: So interestingly, I have a very, very slightly different take on this, or explanatory ways.
[Guest]: Printing money tends to end rent seeking.
[Guest]: It's interesting because when you have a situation where, let's say, Uber, I'll give you an example.
[Guest]: Uber would never have come up any other way.
[Guest]: If I had to buy all of these cars and provide a decent return to my investors, I would not
[Guest]: be running an Uber.
[Guest]: It's just not possible.
[Guest]: What does Uber do is promises drivers an extremely high return, promises taxi takers or people
[Guest]: like us an extremely low price, and bridges the gap by making losses, funded by people
[Guest]: who say, listen, just go ahead and do this until people realize that they can't live
[Guest]: without the service.
[Guest]: They sell their own cars and survive on you.
[Guest]: So now your marginal cost of revenue, so you can reduce the amount you give your drivers
[Guest]: a little bit, increase the fares a little bit, and you reach this extreme profitability
[Guest]: because you have the market size that you wanted.
[Guest]: This would never have been possible with a high interest rate economy.
[Guest]: And you have money printing of this magnitude simply by saying that people have to invest
[Guest]: in risky avenues.
[Guest]: You make such businesses possible.
[Guest]: You increase productivity effectively because what you've done is introduced a far more
[Guest]: productive layer called the Uber taxi than the old taxi, which did not have any.
[Guest]: So in Bombay, you had to go out and stick a finger out and you'd get a taxi.
[Guest]: In Bangalore, your finger would be stuck there forever.
[Guest]: It would, there's just no way to, you know.
[Guest]: So now Uber's evened out things for places that didn't have the Bombay taxis.
[Guest]: And even the Bombay taxis, you had those old Fiat cars because they gave the taxi license
[Guest]: according to the car, not according to the driver.
[Guest]: So you can't get rid of those cars.
[Guest]: And those people are like, because they have the license, they can't give it up.
[Guest]: They can't get a new car.
[Guest]: So what they do is they keep the car on.
[Guest]: So you get a car where you have the stick shift, which nobody has seen since 1977.
[Guest]: And those are the cars you continue to have in Bombay.
[Guest]: That's because of a screwed up rule that allows a municipality to give power to one agency,
[Guest]: which is that whatever the taxi giving agency is, license giving, to determine a rule that
[Guest]: said.
[Guest]: So I was saying that the taxi network that we saw automated in this fashion was all in
[Guest]: some way, the result of cheap money.
[Guest]: Cheap money has resulted in the largest companies in the world being debt free.
[Guest]: Can you imagine what that means?
[Guest]: We made debt cheap.
[Guest]: And today, Apple, Amazon, Microsoft, Google have no borrowings, or Apple has some because
[Guest]: of some tax bullshit.
[Guest]: But net net, they have $140 billion in cash or something like that.
[Guest]: So it's unimaginable, because this is that counterintuitive thing.
[Guest]: How can you make debt almost zero cost?
[Guest]: And yet the largest companies in the world, our companies are debt free.
[Guest]: Reliance in India used this opportunity to make itself net debt free.
[Guest]: It owes banks money because the banks needed to owe them money.
[Guest]: Because if you take away Reliance's debt, the banking system is in bad shape and they
[Guest]: want the companies like Reliance not to give back their loans.
[Guest]: So Reliance has, you know, 150,000 crores in cash, 150,000 crores in loans and net zero.
[Guest]: The printing of money has actually made companies less dependent on debt.
[Guest]: And that also makes sense.
[Guest]: To give you an example, if you have an economy with 10 people owing each other money.
[Guest]: So I use a hairdresser, I owe him money, the hairdresser owes a cyclist, owes him money
[Guest]: and the cyclist owes the shop, owes him money and the shop owes me money.
[Guest]: Technically, all of us are in debt.
[Guest]: If one person were to get paid, they pay back their loans to everybody else, suddenly the
[Guest]: economy is net debt free.
[Guest]: So that does not happen.
[Guest]: The governments have absorbed a bulk of the debt, countries still have or people still
[Guest]: have a large amount of debt, which is why this phenomenon of cutting out the messenger,
[Guest]: cutting out the middleman, cutting out the rent seeker is what the cheap money is doing.
[Guest]: This is also why inflation is not coming up.
[Guest]: Because every time you cut a middleman, you improve productivity.
[Guest]: That productivity increase corresponds to a slightly higher.
[Guest]: So to give you the analogy, let's say there was a place with only one bank, there were
[Guest]: 100 people making widgets of some sort, there are 100 widgets, and each widget costs one
[Guest]: rupee.
[Guest]: So there's 100 rupees in the system.
[Guest]: Somebody finds a way to make everybody produce two widgets instead.
[Guest]: Now there's 200 widgets, there is no 200 rupees to pay for it.
[Guest]: So the price of the widget falls to 50 paisa.
[Guest]: So the price comes down because of the increase in productivity.
[Guest]: So that's what they call real GDP growth, right?
[Guest]: When they say real GDP growth is the fact that your productivity has increased from
[Guest]: 100 to 200.
[Guest]: So you're 100% real GDP growth.
[Guest]: The nominal growth is zero in this case, because the prices went down to half.
[Guest]: What if I printed another 100 rupees?
[Guest]: Now I would have 200 rupees for 200 widgets, and the price would remain the same.
[Guest]: Okay, what if I printed 300 rupees instead?
[Guest]: Now I would have 400 rupees and 200 widgets.
[Guest]: And therefore the price has increased from one rupee to two rupees per widget.
[Guest]: So this is the various macroeconomic factors playing over here, productivity and increase
[Guest]: in money supply.
[Guest]: Right now what's happened is they've increased money supply in a way that hasn't made its
[Guest]: way to the economy.
[Guest]: So a lot of money sits in the banks and with the central banks.
[Guest]: What has made its way to the economy is getting offset by the productivity benefits of cheap
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: So the inflation that we expected to see is simply not there.
[Guest]: But it has resulted in, so the one place that it is not coming is in asset prices, which
[Guest]: means that real estate prices went up when you first reduced money supply, and that was
[Guest]: a big bubble and that thing went bust.
[Guest]: You had then stock prices.
[Guest]: Stock prices went up, they went down because of COVID, not because of an extreme amount
[Guest]: of these things, an external event to do it.
[Guest]: They printed more money, stock prices are back up.
[Guest]: So asset prices have not seen any productivity benefits because there's only positive feedback
[Guest]: loops, unfortunately.
[Guest]: There's no negative feedback loops.
[Guest]: It's like when everybody is listing their own companies and making them go public is
[Guest]: when you might actually see some kind of correction to this phenomenon.
[Guest]: But as I said, people watch the stock market.
[Guest]: So earlier the stock markets were the barometer.
[Guest]: Now you want to influence the barometer.
[Guest]: So I want the temperature to read 90 degrees because earlier you were measuring 90 degrees
[Guest]: and telling me I was healthy.
[Guest]: So I won't let it go below 90 degrees.
[Guest]: So it's like in India, this current government tells us the data that we want to see.
[Guest]: And it's true of past governments as well in different ways.
[Guest]: But suddenly you know that a lot of the data is not really trustworthy.
[Guest]: That's because it's a flexibility at work.
[Guest]: And the same thing with asset prices, they're not letting it come down because it will make
[Guest]: them look bad.
[Guest]: And they have the power to do this.
[Guest]: At one point, they will not.
[Guest]: Bitcoin is perhaps the geek answer to this, saying if you increase the price of everything,
[Guest]: I will buy something that, you know, protects me.
[Guest]: But protects you from what?
[Guest]: It protects you from nothing.
[Guest]: It's just basically another invention of human beings that is currently not controlled by
[Guest]: anybody.
[Guest]: When I say currently, I mean that there are plans for people to control it.
[Guest]: There's technology that allows people to control it.
[Guest]: But when you have asset price inflation like this, so to give you an idea of what happened
[Guest]: in hyperinflation, in Russia once there was, for a short period of time in 2014, before
[Guest]: that we used to see that in Zimbabwe, when you had hyperinflation, people went and bought
[Guest]: real assets.
[Guest]: When I say real asset, I mean cars, iPhones, pens, expensive pens, because they retained
[Guest]: value even through the inflationary scenario.
[Guest]: That aspect is just translate that into, boss, they're printing money like crazy, let's just
[Guest]: go buy stocks.
[Guest]: That's what is happening.
[Guest]: There is hyperinflation in asset prices, but we don't care because we don't have to consume
[Amit Varma]: asset prices.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, what kind of strikes me here is that politics gets into this and therefore
[Amit Varma]: narratives get into this because like you said, once it becomes a barometer, like anything
[Amit Varma]: that becomes a metric can be gamed.
[Amit Varma]: For example, at one point, the GDP became a metric.
[Amit Varma]: The economy is a economy doing well, and therefore it is in the government's interest to game
[Amit Varma]: the GDP.
[Amit Varma]: And it's easy for the government to gain the GDP because government spending is a part
[Amit Varma]: of GDP.
[Amit Varma]: So it can dig up a million ditches and fill them up and your GDP goes up.
[Amit Varma]: And there are various other ways to gain the GDP.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, it seems to me that if people are looking at stock market prices, as a metric
[Amit Varma]: by which you sort of judge how well the economy is doing, that's also easy to game, just print
[Amit Varma]: more money, boom.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, because of all of these other factors and these positive feedback loops
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, it isn't actually reflecting on the ground and there's no hyperinflation
[Amit Varma]: as of yet.
[Amit Varma]: But who knows what unintended consequences and unseen effects lie waiting for us down
[Amit Varma]: the road.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe 10 years later, if we do an episode, we can discuss, yeah, if only we were known
[Amit Varma]: at the time.
[Amit Varma]: A few final questions.
[Amit Varma]: And here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I did an episode a few weeks back with the advertising guru Ambi Parmeswaran,
[Amit Varma]: who's written a bunch of books on advertising.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things I realized talking with him and talking earlier with Santosh Desai,
[Amit Varma]: another advertising giant I had done an episode with, is that following the advertising of
[Amit Varma]: the country, you can actually get a lot of insights into our society and our culture
[Amit Varma]: and our economy.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, while talking to you, it strikes me that for someone who follows the stock
[Amit Varma]: market as closely as you do, which is not just the world of perceptions and all of the
[Amit Varma]: feedback loops that happen within, but a lot of it, you know, feeds down into the real
[Amit Varma]: world.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the most obvious example of that was, you know, it's almost a quiz question where
[Amit Varma]: three months ago, there was this chart which showed one company shares plunging down and
[Amit Varma]: the other one plunging up on the same day.
[Amit Varma]: And that was the day the vaccine was announced.
[Amit Varma]: So one was Zoom and the other was some airline.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, so that the real world is involved here.
[Amit Varma]: And you're looking at investing and stock market so closely must have also given you
[Amit Varma]: interesting bits of insight about our nation and our society.
[Amit Varma]: Is that the case?
[Guest]: And you know, would you like to share some of that?
[Guest]: Oh, yes.
[Guest]: I mean, if you think about the softwares we're using right now, we're looking at the operating
[Guest]: systems on our cell phones, almost none of them have any listings in India.
[Guest]: I mean, we, if you think about the early 2000s or late 1990s, the time that every product
[Guest]: you use, you could buy it off the stock market, you could buy Hindustan Unilever, the soaps
[Guest]: you use, you could buy, you know, so almost everything that you use was listed.
[Guest]: Today, a lot of the stuff that you use is not listed in India.
[Guest]: What do you get in Indian markets is a stark contrast to anything that you get in foreign
[Guest]: markets.
[Guest]: That means the best, the companies that we use today are almost all exclusively listed
[Guest]: in the US.
[Guest]: The companies that are listed in India are companies who you know about, but you, for
[Guest]: instance, if I told you Tata Steel is a great company, yes, yes.
[Guest]: But if I gave you 10 steel bars, I'm telling you, there is no way you would have figured
[Guest]: out which one is from Tata Steel and which one is from GSW Steel.
[Guest]: And of course, they try to print their names on it just to show the difference.
[Guest]: But they behave exactly the same.
[Guest]: The commodity products that drive a lot of the Indian top companies is coal, cement,
[Guest]: oil and gas, and a bunch of things.
[Guest]: One few companies are trying to break out of that loop has been something like Reliance,
[Guest]: who's gone and done a Jio and a bunch of startup level investments.
[Guest]: So there are few and far between.
[Guest]: And to a very large extent, I say this quite often, perhaps you should go and go to a company's
[Guest]: website and the number of companies website on which you can actually do a transaction
[Guest]: to buy that company's products indicates the level of technology that has permeated into
[Guest]: an economy.
[Guest]: In the last 10 years, perhaps that ratio in India has improved 10%.
[Guest]: In the US, it's probably 90%.
[Guest]: And that's quite amazing, because you could go to Zoom and buy Zoom as a product.
[Guest]: In Reliance, of course, I think one of their website, many websites, you could actually
[Guest]: buy stuff, but hardly any.
[Guest]: So many of the others, you simply can't, they just give you information about who they are
[Guest]: as a company.
[Guest]: You could even go and visit a TCS or HCL tech company and at best, they'll tell you to contact
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: But you couldn't download or use any of their products, even though they are tech companies.
[Guest]: Even the technology savvy of them are not for you.
[Guest]: So in a way, they're not reflective of the economy.
[Guest]: The stock market is not for sure.
[Guest]: That's why there's a dichotomy between the stock market and the real economy.
[Guest]: Because a lot of the products that people use on a regular basis, even the Indian ones
[Guest]: are not listed.
[Guest]: We use Zomato, Swiggy, BTM, I don't know, there are a bunch of things that we do.
[Guest]: None of them are listed in India.
[Guest]: Some of them don't want to be listed in India, some of them can't because of our rules.
[Guest]: So our stock market really determines the kind of influence technology has had in our
[Guest]: lives.
[Guest]: I have a lot of hope, because I feel that the next era is going to be where technology
[Guest]: companies take over the Indian economy.
[Guest]: But you can see the level of sophistication in that economy by just looking at how evolved
[Guest]: the companies are from a tech basis, even if they're not tech companies.
[Guest]: I mean, Zomato is not a tech company.
[Guest]: They're a company that has an app, but that primarily does delivery, right?
[Guest]: So Tesla, on the other hand, is a technology company that also sells cars, which is such
[Guest]: a difference, because you can't say that of almost any company in India, original R&D
[Guest]: and stuff like that, it's not like we don't have the brains.
[Guest]: It's just that for some reason, we haven't gotten there yet.
[Guest]: And maybe that happens when India becomes a bigger economy, $5 trillion.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, is India being, you know, low down the value chain and the kind of things that
[Amit Varma]: we do so much of commodity and not enough innovation?
[Amit Varma]: Is that partly because of cultural factors like risk aversion and all that?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it because of regulatory environment or governance?
[Amit Varma]: What do you think are the reasons behind it?
[Amit Varma]: And is that something that you see changing?
[Guest]: Yes, I think the reason is simple.
[Guest]: It's high interest rates.
[Guest]: Today, informal interest rates are still 24% a year.
[Guest]: Of course, credit cards worldwide jib people.
[Guest]: So that's a that's a horrible metric to look at.
[Guest]: But you go to a bank, they don't want to give you a loan less than 12%.
[Guest]: Now they're saying, okay, home loans at six and a half percent.
[Guest]: Somebody recently talked about some other loans at 8%.
[Guest]: But the first time I'm starting to hear of them, and these banks are borrowing it, you
[Guest]: know, 3% or 4%, there's no competition in that banking sector.
[Guest]: And until now, it has not been prudent for people to actually try to take risks.
[Guest]: I wrote a blog post in 2006.
[Guest]: I had no idea this would happen, that my expenses would inflate at roughly 6% a year.
[Guest]: I looked at that blog post yesterday, I said, shit, let me see how much my expenses are
[Guest]: today.
[Guest]: And you know what, it's it's inflated 5.1% a year.
[Guest]: Not not bad.
[Guest]: Which is, and at that time, when I wrote 6% a year, people told me doesn't 6% too less
[Guest]: India's inflation is 10.
[Guest]: I said, No, but my inflation is different from India's inflation, because the product
[Guest]: basket I use is different.
[Guest]: So I think my core inflation, I mean, not count, I didn't have kids at the time.
[Guest]: So I said, not counting kids school expenses, have you factored in the piano, piano came
[Guest]: free, I bought it in 2000, remember.
[Guest]: So so but interestingly, the inflation that I have, I mean, I'm talking minus school fees
[Guest]: is so your with inflation being at 5%, I was able to get eight to 9% interest rates at
[Guest]: that time, till two years ago, I think it was eight to 9%, maybe two, three years, seven
[Guest]: or eight percent.
[Guest]: So my inflation on a personal level is 5%.
[Guest]: And I'm getting 7%.
[Guest]: Why do I need to take risks?
[Guest]: If that were to change, and you're fighting against somebody else, who has to compete,
[Guest]: not against a 12% interest rate, but against a 5% interest rate, which is perhaps China
[Guest]: or America or things like that, it's no wonder they'll win, because they have to earn lesser
[Guest]: profits and they can beat you on price.
[Guest]: So we then stop imports, because come on, how can they have cheaper products than ours?
[Guest]: But the answer is, you know, they have cheaper products by the lower interest rates, we've
[Guest]: screwed up, and we've managed to control inflation to a very large extent till last year, but
[Guest]: we steadfastly kept our rates too high.
[Guest]: And that has resulted, according to me, in us being extremely non-competitive.
[Guest]: It's one of the factors.
[Guest]: There are hundreds of other factors, regulatory overload, you can't start an investment company
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: I can't invest in Amit Verma without you perhaps even getting an income tax notice saying how
[Guest]: the hell did Deepak Sinha invest in you at a high valuation, because you're doing fraud.
[Guest]: This is how the regulatory and tax situations in India are.
[Guest]: So that also contributes to this lack of this thing.
[Guest]: But we are an extremely entrepreneurial country, and formal credit is available to very few
[Guest]: people in order to start their businesses, and it's available at a very high cost.
[Guest]: And these factors together, according to me, is why India loves the coal companies and
[Guest]: just the large business.
[Guest]: We still want big employers.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: I mean, why can't we just exercise more of this?
[Guest]: I mean, the reason Swiggy works is because each person thinks he's its own boss, because
[Guest]: he's actually a rider, he's a consultant.
[Guest]: He's not actually employed by Swiggy.
[Guest]: And like this, we could create a billion or zillion different kinds of models.
[Guest]: But we still love the fact that in one factory, there will be a thousand people, and a thousand
[Guest]: people will get jobs.
[Guest]: But that philosophy is why I think we continue to like our top players.
[Guest]: And in a way, we have become a little bit more like Korea and Japan.
[Guest]: We will rescue the top corporates and not let them go down.
[Guest]: Japan did that with the top six Japanese companies.
[Guest]: The Korean Chai Ball is famous.
[Guest]: Samsung and LG continue to be the top kind of players in Korea.
[Guest]: That's because those countries have said these guys are too big to fail, and we will bail
[Guest]: them out at all costs.
[Guest]: India has done it to all its banks, and to a lot of large corporates as well, which causes
[Guest]: resentment.
[Guest]: But more like they hate people who come and disrupt those people's businesses as well.
[Guest]: So that is the philosophy of the thought process.
[Guest]: And I use Hindi there for a reason, because it's almost become Indian, in the sense that
[Guest]: the philosophy is more Indian.
[Guest]: Because in America, you would let companies, I mean, till last year, you would have let
[Guest]: companies fail.
[Guest]: Now there also, they don't let companies fail.
[Guest]: But failure, unfortunately, is considered.
[Guest]: So these companies will go down because some companies will have to come and become better
[Guest]: than them, not that these companies will fail.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, it's tragic.
[Amit Varma]: And when you talk about rescuing these big companies, what is happening is that their
[Amit Varma]: profits are being privatized, but their losses are being socialized, which basically means
[Amit Varma]: it comes down on us and on our taxes, which remember is part-time slavery, instead of
[Amit Varma]: working from January to March, you'll have to work for a few days of April for the government
[Amit Varma]: for free also.
[Amit Varma]: That is what gulami is, my good friend.
[Amit Varma]: You think you're a free person?
[Amit Varma]: No, you aren't.
[Amit Varma]: So I have sort of three final questions for you before I let you go.
[Amit Varma]: You've been very generous with your time.
[Amit Varma]: And as both of us know enough economics to know that this has an opportunity cost.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm very grateful that you're, you know, hanging out and chatting with me, though,
[Amit Varma]: we could also point out that it's a positive sum game and we are both having fun.
[Amit Varma]: So my third last question for you is basically this, that if the Deepak Chinnoy of 2021 could
[Amit Varma]: meet the Deepak Chinnoy of 2001, and give him advice about these are my TILs over the
[Amit Varma]: last 20 years, which will help you in your journey, both your investing journey and your
[Amit Varma]: journey in general.
[Amit Varma]: What would you tell young Deepak?
[Guest]: Perhaps one thing that I mean, of course, my first feeling is to tell him all the stocks
[Guest]: to buy.
[Amit Varma]: So that, you know, by 2003, you can't be specific, just meta level stuff.
[Guest]: But I mean, this is my problem, right?
[Guest]: This is the stock market problem of people going from the future back to the past.
[Guest]: But one of the things that I think people will, I mean, I would tell that person is
[Guest]: I changed careers completely, I was a tech guy, I moved to finance, and it was a long
[Guest]: period of fighting with myself before I changed it.
[Guest]: And that period of that fight was very useless, because I could use my skills on the tech
[Guest]: level in the finance world.
[Guest]: And tech skills by themselves have a use in that they're only useful in some world that
[Guest]: they build.
[Guest]: It's only recently that tech can be useful by itself.
[Guest]: But usually it helps some other industry.
[Guest]: So to that extent, I think the person that I would say that I should become is to stop
[Guest]: fighting those battles about what is the right way to proceed in the future.
[Guest]: Now, in 2001, I was running a business.
[Guest]: And that business was actually doing well, even though there was a downturn in the economy.
[Guest]: And I believed at that point, a lot of those things that I thought would come true, just
[Guest]: if I gave it time, it would.
[Guest]: I think the new me would just say, listen, always set up a time frame.
[Guest]: If things don't work out on those time frames, you're out, you need to be out, you need to.
[Guest]: And maybe trading and markets have taught me that, that, you know, set up a stop loss.
[Guest]: And if things don't work out by that time, you're out, that's the learning I would take
[Guest]: to that time, because it was not intuitive.
[Guest]: Because at that time, I thought, dude, I'm an engineer, I'm a smart guy, I can figure
[Guest]: out anything.
[Guest]: The role of luck is perhaps, you know, this is Uncle Me talking to Younger Me.
[Guest]: And Younger Me would never listen to an Uncle Me.
[Guest]: But really, it's like, appreciate the role of luck and create more opportunities for
[Guest]: luck.
[Guest]: So at some point in the middle, I had stopped that opportunity.
[Guest]: And that landed up in a situation where in 2005, I was, you know, for a small period
[Guest]: of time, bankrupt.
[Guest]: When I say bankrupt, not really, I didn't owe anybody money, but I didn't have any money
[Guest]: after seven years of working, I was a temporary phase, I borrowed money from my wife to kind
[Guest]: of pay for a few things.
[Guest]: But I don't think I kept that in mind when I was running the business that there is something
[Guest]: beyond.
[Guest]: For a guy who talks about personal finance and investing, I was a horrible investor.
[Guest]: I'm the opposite of a lot of things.
[Guest]: I tell people to save all the time.
[Guest]: My entire future is dependent on the company I've built, or I've helped build, and which
[Guest]: is that all of my bets are there, I tell people to diversify, but my bets are there, for the
[Guest]: most part.
[Guest]: So similarly, I think the learnings of what I'm doing right now, is that you got to build
[Guest]: yourself a little bit more of a saving and a kitty, that you could have done more of
[Guest]: your stuff that you want to do for passion, or that you stuff you really like, that can
[Guest]: build you a great asset in the future, can happen earlier than you thought.
[Guest]: You don't slavery to the government for four months, sometimes it's slavery to something
[Guest]: else for 12 months.
[Guest]: And to a lot of people, it's like, dude, I'm slaving off anyway, might as well slave for
[Guest]: the government at the same time.
[Guest]: So that was the philosophy that drove me to entrepreneurship multiple times.
[Guest]: And perhaps in hindsight, I didn't have to go through, to be honest, like I said, the
[Guest]: young me would just not listen to the old me.
[Guest]: So whatever I say, I do it.
[Guest]: I think more or less, you know, it's just sad, but that's perhaps I see that in my children
[Guest]: now and I kind of admire them for it.
[Guest]: Although I'm very frustrated sometimes, why not, why not, no dad, YouTube channel manager
[Guest]: is a job.
[Guest]: Okay, no, but yes, okay, it is perhaps because he shows me these numbers that these people
[Guest]: make.
[Guest]: And I'm like, that's not a job, but that's a lot of money, where, you know, I mean, that's
[Guest]: just me being the same, but I tell you, sometimes not listening to people like me is a good
[Amit Varma]: thing.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: So your uncle use advice to the younger you is don't listen to me, which is fantastically
[Amit Varma]: meta in ways I can't even begin to describe a second last piece of advice.
[Amit Varma]: Listeners of the show always want to know what books to read to learn more about a subject.
[Amit Varma]: So if you are, say someone like me, intelligent lay person, I hope I can describe myself as
[Amit Varma]: that intelligent lay person want to learn more about a subject.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what are my first go to is not necessarily just books.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe there's a YouTube series out there.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe there's a MOOC somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: But if someone wants to learn about investing, what are the first steps that they should
[Amit Varma]: take in your view?
[Amit Varma]: Or what are the books that shaped you?
[Guest]: This is actually incredibly difficult to answer, because I think I have both been led and misled
[Guest]: by books.
[Guest]: The unfortunate problem that you have with authority in this industry is that they do
[Guest]: not accept that there are many right ways to solve the same problem and that money printing
[Guest]: creates inflation and money printing does not create inflation are both correct at the
[Guest]: same time, perhaps at the same place.
[Guest]: So a lot of the theory is wrong in the sense that you don't have, I mean, not much of this
[Guest]: is known.
[Guest]: Sometimes you take some time to understand, but what I would say is my reading or my entire
[Guest]: series of reading that's the stuff that started it, some of it no longer exists.
[Guest]: So there was this lady, her name was Doris Dungy, she was called Tanta or Tanta, I don't
[Guest]: know how it's pronounced, but there's a blog called calculatedriskblog.com.
[Guest]: And to be honest, a lot of the stuff I learned around about things like mortgages and economic
[Guest]: fundamentals were from that blog at that time.
[Guest]: She unfortunately passed away from cancer and her writing, although survives in the
[Guest]: blog is probably no longer relevant in a way that it used to be at the time.
[Guest]: And she talked about the housing crisis before there was a housing crisis.
[Guest]: She talked about mortgages and, you know, a lot of the understanding of my understanding
[Guest]: of that field at that time was from there.
[Guest]: Another thing that I learned was that you read interviews and podcasts like ours, perhaps
[Guest]: to get these little nuggets of information that you would otherwise find difficult for
[Guest]: someone to paraphrase into a book.
[Guest]: And there is a podcast called simply invest like the best by Patrick O'Shaughnessy.
[Guest]: So it's a very interesting podcast on people investing nowadays, a lot of topics may not
[Amit Varma]: be a book is by James O'Shaughnessy.
[Guest]: Maybe this is his dad, I don't know.
[Guest]: Of course, his dad is also a legendary investor.
[Guest]: So he's also an investor, he runs a fund, but he also takes these podcasts with very
[Guest]: interesting people and that I think has very interesting analysis.
[Guest]: Now, the more you look at that podcast, the more you realize how different investing has
[Guest]: become because a lot of the topics there are private company investing, Bitcoin, real estate,
[Guest]: stocks, different kinds of stocks and so on.
[Guest]: There's another set of books by a guy called Jack Schwager.
[Guest]: These are books that actually initially attracted me to investing algorithmically.
[Guest]: The book that I read about these turtles, the phenomenon that I talked to you about
[Guest]: was written in 1990.
[Guest]: This book, the first series, it's called Market Wizards.
[Guest]: And there are about four or five hedge fund market wizards, stock market wizards.
[Guest]: The first two in that book, Market Wizards and the New Market Wizards, talk about investing
[Guest]: as a career and people who built their investing out of it is just purely interviews of them.
[Guest]: If you want to learn about the history of the stock market in the US, and it's very
[Guest]: interesting because India has parallels and India does not have a similar book, is a book
[Guest]: called What Goes Up.
[Guest]: It's a beautiful book.
[Guest]: It just contains a lot of sayings and quotes by a lot of people through the various series.
[Guest]: So right from 1929, just post 1929, to the start of Merrill Lynch in 1930, of course,
[Guest]: it stops before Merrill Lynch was eliminated from history, but it's a very interesting
[Guest]: history of the time of the US stock market.
[Guest]: In India, there's a book called The Scam by Sucheta Dalal and Devashish Basu, which is
[Guest]: phenomenal.
[Guest]: I mean, you might have seen the series on Sony Life, but if you like economics, it may
[Guest]: be a little daunting, but the amount of data in that is spectacular.
[Guest]: It talks about so many things that I didn't know about in 1992.
[Guest]: I now understand that subject a little bit more, but I think lots of credit to Sucheta
[Guest]: and Devashish for actually simplifying going through and looking through all of that in
[Guest]: that angle.
[Guest]: So these are educational books from the perspective of, in the end of it, I could ask you five
[Guest]: questions and you can answer them, but they put things across in a perspective that'll
[Guest]: shape the way you are.
[Guest]: So if you want purely, like the Benjamin Graham book you mentioned, which I have, I have tried
[Guest]: seven times.
[Guest]: I have not been able to go past at least 30 pages.
[Guest]: This is my problem with Atlas Shrugged as well, so I'm sorry to Ayn Rand.
[Guest]: I have not been able to go past 30 pages and it is my problem.
[Guest]: Like Nasim Taleb's second book, Black Swan, that's the book, I haven't been able to get
[Guest]: just past the book because at some point there are some things which I just can't read.
[Guest]: But the interesting thing about those books is that the thought process is, I mean, it
[Guest]: may not tell you what to invest in or why and all that stuff, but it'll give you an
[Guest]: interesting thought process.
[Guest]: So for instance, I don't agree with one book at all.
[Guest]: Like there's this book by Robert Kiyosaki called, you know, Rich Dad, Poor Dad.
[Guest]: I don't agree with a lot of concepts of that book, but one point which he makes, which
[Guest]: is passive income and how it can change your life, that's worth carrying home.
[Guest]: Sometimes you want to read people who do different things from what you say or what you think.
[Guest]: So for instance, I may not like Warren Buffett's philosophies quite as much as, you know, as
[Guest]: in his investing style, I'm not a value investor by the face of it.
[Guest]: But I think a lot of his sayings have a lot of very interesting answers.
[Guest]: So one of the statements that he says, and you should read this book by Warren Buffett,
[Guest]: which is not a glorifying book.
[Guest]: It's by a book guy called Roger Lovenstein called Buffett, as unimaginative as that,
[Guest]: but it's a brilliant book because it goes through his life in a different way.
[Guest]: There's another book which he's written called When Genius Failed, which talks about why
[Guest]: this algorithmic trading thing, when people think that they're too intelligent, what happens?
[Guest]: It was a book, it's a story of think or long term capital management run by Nobel laureates.
[Guest]: So they brought down the whole economic system.
[Guest]: And you know what, to this date, their formula continues to be followed religiously by everybody,
[Guest]: including regulators, saying this is the only formula that exists because in spite of his
[Guest]: dramatic failure, we don't have an alternative, got to have something to believe in, man.
[Guest]: So you know, that's unfortunately the, I won't recommend too many books because you know,
[Guest]: you don't have to have something to believe in, you don't have to have another hero.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, When Genius Failed is great.
[Amit Varma]: And I have read No Rand, a little bit of Graham, all of Talib, though I find him very entertaining
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: He keeps fighting with all my favorite public intellectuals.
[Amit Varma]: So that's really, he's blocked me, he's blocked you, oh, you actually interacted with him.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: There you go.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, he's extremely acerbic in an entertaining way, but he's fought with a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: I admire on Twitter, like Steven Pinker, Philip Tetlock, Per Ballon, Nate Silver, he just
[Amit Varma]: shits on all of them all the time.
[Amit Varma]: So that's good fun.
[Amit Varma]: No, this is this is like a fabulous list.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm kind of reminded of how you know, when poker began evolving, like around circa
[Amit Varma]: 2002, you could have bought books on poker.
[Amit Varma]: But what has happened over the last 10 years is that there is no book which is really up
[Amit Varma]: to date.
[Amit Varma]: It's changing really fast.
[Amit Varma]: All you have is nuggets of wisdom here and there.
[Amit Varma]: People who really know shit are not going to share it randomly.
[Amit Varma]: Because obviously, they're still making money off it.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, there was a period of time of about five years coinciding with the years
[Amit Varma]: when I was a pro that you basically had to pick up nuggets from here and there.
[Amit Varma]: And all the books were outdated.
[Amit Varma]: And basically, they would lead you down the wrong track.
[Amit Varma]: So my final question, because it's pretty late in the night, and I want to let you get
[Amit Varma]: back to your home and your dinner and the raucous piano playing of your progeny is now
[Amit Varma]: that we're ending this episode, and our listeners hopefully are much more interested in who
[Amit Varma]: is this Deepak Chinoy, who has given us so much Gyan, tell me a little bit about Capital
[Amit Varma]: Mind.
[Amit Varma]: What does Capital Mind do?
[Amit Varma]: And why should people go to Capital Mind for their investment needs?
[Guest]: Yeah, okay, this is going to be a pitch.
[Amit Varma]: So it's pitched that way it is it is nakedly a pitch.
[Guest]: So I'm inviting nakedly pitches.
[Guest]: Yes, brilliant.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So Capital Mind at CapitalMind.in is a semi-registered portfolio manager.
[Guest]: So we actually manage money.
[Guest]: We also run something called Capital Mind premium.
[Guest]: Both of these are different.
[Guest]: One is do it yourself.
[Guest]: The premium is a do it yourself model where we explain various trading, we have portfolios,
[Guest]: we have different explanatory posts on how things work from macroeconomics to bond markets
[Guest]: to different ways you can buy different kinds of bonds and make money and save taxes, and
[Guest]: how to invest your money and so on.
[Guest]: This is a premium community on Slack, which is, you know, it's helps this is a do it yourself
[Guest]: model.
[Guest]: But we as a semi-registered portfolio manager, we also have a do it, we do it for you model.
[Guest]: So where we can take your money and invest it in your name, into stocks and fixed income.
[Guest]: We have a bunch of algorithms and tech behind it.
[Guest]: So it's fintech in a way that isn't completely algorithmic, but we've designed algorithms
[Guest]: that help you reach longer term goals.
[Guest]: And we have portfolios that are complex, like we have a multi-cap and momentum strategy,
[Guest]: both of which use different philosophies, but to invest in different stocks in the market.
[Guest]: We also have something that you might, you said talked about, which is just blindly something
[Guest]: that's stupid.
[Guest]: We have something that's about 65% India's top 100 stocks, 35% US top 100 stocks and
[Guest]: nothing else.
[Guest]: Relatively cheap, continuous investment strategy that strangely has beaten most mutual funds
[Guest]: and even most of our other investing strategies other than momentum, which has done really
[Guest]: well in the last one or two years.
[Guest]: Of course, this is a minimum of 50 lakhs.
[Guest]: So we can't accept less, unfortunately, but we keep our fees relatively low.
[Guest]: So very high value for money service and a lot of technology so that we can automate
[Guest]: most of the tasks that people otherwise regularly, I mean, other companies in this industry might
[Guest]: find it more difficult to do.
[Guest]: We are a system based on a lot of simplicity.
[Guest]: We're a small team of 18 people in Bangalore, 20 people now in Bangalore, but with a lot
[Guest]: of heart and a lot of gumption.
[Guest]: So you can find me on Twitter, you'll find me on YouTube.
[Guest]: I find a lot of our team members on both Twitter and YouTube talking about these things.
[Guest]: We are also, you know, hopefully, as things grow, we'll probably get more involved into
[Guest]: the fintech area.
[Guest]: One thing we don't do at this point, and probably sometimes it's more useful to tell people
[Guest]: what we don't do.
[Guest]: We don't do, we don't sell insurance, we don't do things like fixed deposits, we're not a
[Guest]: bank, we don't lend people money.
[Guest]: And we try to keep it as simple as possible.
[Guest]: That's my core dynamic.
[Guest]: I think what would be useful is, you know, if you're looking at reading, even some of
[Guest]: the books that we've talked about, I haven't actually talked about all the books that we
[Guest]: recommended.
[Guest]: There's a post that came out recently, which has a bunch of books that the team loves to
[Guest]: read.
[Amit Varma]: Some of which I haven't read.
[Guest]: I'll link that from the show notes.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: We have a library here consisting about 75% of books that I have read and 25% that I will
[Guest]: pretend to have read.
[Guest]: And so you know, please, if you're in town, we would like to visit, we're in HSR layout
[Guest]: in Bangalore as well.
[Guest]: So just as a tiny introduction to what Capital Mind is, also, one of the things that we will
[Guest]: not do is guarantee returns.
[Guest]: So if you ask, kitna milega, I have no idea.
[Guest]: So that's the only thing that I can tell you that I can't tell you.
[Amit Varma]: Anyone who guarantees you a return is a fraud.
[Amit Varma]: Another of the lessons that I remember you've kind of shared in the past and you know, among
[Amit Varma]: the many, many, many lessons you've shared in this episode and in all of your writing
[Amit Varma]: and podcasts, we'll of course link the Capital Mind podcast on the show notes and your writing
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: Deepak, thanks so much for, you know, taking so much time out for the show.
[Guest]: Hey, thanks, man.
[Guest]: I think if anybody is here, I'm going to personally clap for you guys.
[Guest]: I mean, all of you made it all the way to the end.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amit.
[Guest]: This has been wonderful.
[Guest]: I have no qualms about time at all, but I guess the internet is telling us that it's
[Amit Varma]: time to go.
[Amit Varma]: It's kept disconnecting us during this recording.
[Amit Varma]: So we've basically been sitting together for almost four and a half hours, though obviously
[Amit Varma]: the episode will be much shorter than that.
[Amit Varma]: So thanks, Deepak.
[Guest]: Cheers.
[Guest]: Thanks.
[Guest]: Thanks again.
[Guest]: Thanks everyone for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, hop on over to the show notes for relevant
[Amit Varma]: links.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Deepak on Twitter at Deepak Shenoy.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: It will be an excellent investment of your time.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.